                 THE COMMITTEE ON ENTERTAINMENT LAW
                                 OF THE
             ASSOCIATION OF THE BAR OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK

                                                                              January, 2003

The Committee gratefully acknowledges the contributions of prior chairpersons, Noel L.
Silverman and Victoria G. Traube, and of H. Joseph Mello, the initial editor.




                                 MUSIC RIGHTS PRIMER
                                           Introduction
         This Primer is intended to assist lawyers who are not actively engaged in the music sub-

specialty of entertainment law, but who, from time to time, may be involved with matters

pertaining to that area. It is also intended for law students and non-lawyers who have an interest

or involvement in the entertainment industry.

         We envision this Primer to be used primarily to explain the different rights that fall under

the generic term “music rights”, and to delineate generally which rights are necessary for

projects or product in this medium. It is not intended as a replacement for an exhaustive treatise

and should not be considered a substitute for specialized legal representation required to resolve

the complex issues that often arise in transactions involving music rights. Rather, it is designed

to highlight issues and to provide the basic understanding of the foundations of a music project.

Specialists in the field should be consulted when additional legal assistance is needed. They can

easily be found in New York, Los Angeles and Nashville, and to a lesser extent, in other parts of

the country.

         This Primer deals with music rights in the United States only. While many of the

principles discussed below apply in other countries as well, there may be significant differences,

and resolution of foreign issues is outside the scope of this Primer. In general, if it is intended




LH002381.4                                        1
that particular rights may be exercised outside the United States, the license with the rights

owner should specify all territories granted.


                 Music Copyright Versus Sound Recording Copyright
         At the outset it is important to distinguish between rights in a song, and rights in a sound

recording that may embody the song. When we hear a recorded song, two separate and distinct

intellectual properties are involved that need to be identified and understood. The first property is

the music composition, itself—the words and music composed by the songwriter(s). The second

property is the sound recording—the fixed embodiment of sounds resulting from the recorded

performance of that musical composition. Publishing rights in a song include the right to exploit

the song in any medium, and are unrelated to the identity of the performer or performers of a

particular recorded version of the song. Sound or master recording rights, on the other hand,

include only the rights in a particular fixed performance of a musical composition. A user will

have to consider obtaining separate rights for both the use of the song and the sound recording.

         The author of each property—as to the musical composition usually the songwriter, and

as to the sound recording the producer (often, the record company)—is the initial owner of the

intellectual property, in each case a copyright.

         Copyright affords its owner the following exclusive rights which are itemized in Section

106 of the Copyright Act (17 U.S.C.106):

                        (1)     to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords;
                        (2)     to prepare derivative works based upon the copyrighted work;
                        (3)     to distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the
         public by sale or other transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease or lending;
                        (4)     in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works,
         pantomimes, and motion pictures and other audiovisual works to perform the copyrighted
         work publicly;
                        (5)     in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works,
         pantomimes, and pictorial, graphic, or sculptural works including the individual images
         of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, to display the copyrighted work publicly;
         and
                        (6)     in the case of sound recordings, to perform the copyrighted work
         publicly by means of a digital audio transmission.


LH002381.4                                         2
                                      “Publishing” Rights
         So-called music publishing rights generally encompass the right to record, the right to

perform, the right to duplicate, and the right to include the work in a new or different work,

sometimes called a derivative work. In order to facilitate the exploitation of the songwriter’s

songs, the songwriter generally transfers the publishing rights to an entity identified as “the

publisher,” pursuant to a music publishing agreement that assigns the copyright or administration

rights to the publisher, which then shares publishing income with the songwriter as stipulated in

the agreement. In music parlance, the categories under the umbrella called publishing rights—all
derived from Section 106 of the Copyright Act—are referred to as mechanical rights,

synchronization rights, print rights and public performance rights.



Mechanical Rights
         The right to reproduce and distribute to the public a copyrighted musical composition on

phonorecords (which include audiotapes, compact discs and any other material object in which

sounds are fixed, except those accompanying motion pictures and other audiovisual works), is

called the mechanical right. (The terminology “mechanical” dates from the days of the player

piano, when a perforated cylinder was inserted into the mechanism and a composition literally
was “mechanically reproduced.”)

         Licenses granted to the user to exploit the mechanical rights are called mechanical

licenses. Once the copyright owner of a musical composition authorizes the public distribution

of phonorecords embodying the composition for the first time, anyone else may then also record

that musical composition and distribute phonorecords of that new recording by following the
procedure established by the Copyright Act, which requires giving notice to the owner and

paying a statutory royalty for each phonorecord manufactured and distributed. This is called a

compulsory license. Publishers may, and more frequently do, issue such licenses voluntarily;



LH002381.4                                        3
many utilize The Harry Fox Agency (see "Resources" at the end of this Primer) to handle

mechanical license grants on their behalf.

         The compulsory license is available only for audio recordings which are manufactured

for distribution primarily to the public for private use. It does not extend to use of music in

audiovisual works such as television programming or motion pictures (see "synchronization

rights," in next section), nor to services which furnish background music to commercial

establishments (see "public performance rights"), nor to broadcast transcriptions.

         As of January 1, 2002, the statutory mechanical rate is 8 cents per song or 1.55 cents per

minute of playing time per unit sold/distributed (whichever is greater). This rate is scheduled to

increase in 2004 (8.5 cents) and 2006 (9.1 cents). The statutory rate applies only if the record

company elects to utilize the compulsory mechanical license provisions of the Copyright Act or

if it is incorporated by reference in a consensual license. However, the record company is free to

bargain with the publisher for a lower rate.



Synchronization Rights
         The right to record a musical composition in synchronized relation to the frames or

pictures in an audiovisual production, such as a motion picture, television program, television

commercial, or video production, is called the synchronization (or “synch”) right. There is no
compulsory license for this right; it is subject to the licensor and licensee reaching mutual

agreement as to terms. In addition to mechanical rights, The Harry Fox Agency represents many

music publishers in handling synchronization licensing.

         As a result of antitrust claims in the middle of the last century, the synchronization right

for a theatrical motion picture must also afford to the film producer the theatrical performance

right (see “public performance rights” below), that is, the right publicly to exhibit the motion

picture, including the song, in theaters. On the other hand, the producer of a television show
which includes a musical composition generally acquires only the synchronization license, while



LH002381.4                                         4
the television station—the broadcaster—must acquire the public performance license, discussed

below.



Print Rights
         The rights to print and sell single song and multiple song (or folio) copies of sheet music

of musical compositions are the print rights licensed by the publisher. Over time, income from

sales of single song sheet music have diminished. An active market exists, however, for folios

and other compilations, which often are constructed around specific artists, styles of music,

record albums, Broadway shows, motion pictures, and similar themes.



Public Performance Rights
         Just over 100 years ago the Copyright Act recognized the right of public performance in

musical compositions. Today, this is generally the most lucrative source of income for many, if

not most songwriters. The Act defines public performance in part as: “to perform or display [the

work] at a place open to the public or at any place where a substantial number of persons outside

of a normal circle of a family and its social acquaintances is gathered.”

         Public performance rights can be broken down into two categories – “small” or “non-

dramatic” rights, and “grand” or “dramatic” rights. Small performance rights include concert
and other so-called “live” performances, incidental and background music on television

programs, and radio airplay. A grand right covers performance of music in a dramatic setting or

in any way which directly advances the plot of the production in which it is included.
         However, the public performance right is not self-enforcing. Performances of

copyrighted music were so numerous, widespread, and transitory that it was virtually impossible

to police the right. By the same token, it was impractical for a performer or band to negotiate a

license for every song played at each performance or venue. This led to songwriters and

publishers joining together to create performing rights organizations, which act as licensing

clearinghouses to facilitate licensing and monitor compliance. In the United States there are

LH002381.4                                        5
three such organizations: ASCAP (American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers),

BMI (Broadcast Music, Inc.) and SESAC (Society of European Stage Authors and Composers),

which represent songwriters and publishers domestically and, through reciprocal arrangements

with similar organizations in other countries, around the world. (See "Resources" section for

contact information).

         Performing rights societies offer so-called “blanket” licenses of their entire catalog,

licenses for a particular production or so-called “per-program” licenses, and individual licenses.

Alternatively, a license may be negotiated directly with the publisher. Performing rights

societies do not, however, grant dramatic (“grand”) performing rights, and such a license must be

obtained directly from the publisher or songwriter, as their respective interests may appear.

         A songwriter and a publisher may belong to only one performance rights society. Since

music publishers may acquire music from writers affiliated with any of the above societies, they

typically form separate companies to affiliate with each society.



Distribution of Income
         Income received by the publisher from mechanical rights, synchronization rights, print

rights, and other licenses are shared with, and paid directly by the publisher to, the songwriter

pursuant to the terms negotiated in the music publishing agreement. Such sharing may be
governed by a variety of formulas which generally reflect the bargaining power of the parties.

However, income from licenses of performing rights issued by performing rights societies do not

pass through the publishing agreement. ASCAP and BMI generally pay fifty percent of

licensing income directly to the songwriter, and fifty percent directly to the publisher, after

deduction of the costs of administration.




LH002381.4                                         6
                                      Master Recordings
         The term Master Recording (or "Master" for short) refers to the original, produced

recording of sounds (on a tape or other storage form) from which a record company makes CD’s

or tapes (or in the old days, LP’s) which it sells to the public. Federal copyright protection was

established for sound recordings fixed on and after February 15, 1972. Sound recordings first

fixed before February 15, 1972 may nonetheless enjoy protection under various state common

law theories or antipiracy statutes. A potential licensee of a master recording who clears the

mechanical rights to use the underlying composition on a record yet fails to secure the master use

right to reproduce the sound recording may be subject, depending on the circumstances, to action

under the Copyright Act or state law.

         Because the Master Recording embodies creative material from a number of different

persons, it can be complicated to obtain the proper clearances. Below is a basic checklist of the

creative rights that need to be secured in order to create a Master to be released to the public by

or under the authority of the copyright owner pursuant to Section 106(3) of the Copyright Act.



The Songs
         The starting point for any Master is the music—the songs. Whether the songs included

on the Master are written by the performing artist or by another songwriter, the record company
is required to obtain a license to use those songs—the mechanical license (discussed above). If

the song is written by the recording artist (or musical group), that license is either included in the

recording agreement or the rate(s) at which such license must be issued is specified. Musical

compositions written or controlled and performed by a recording artist are called “controlled

compositions.” If the song was controlled by a third party, a mechanical license to use it must be

obtained either through a clearance company such as The Harry Fox Agency or directly from the

publisher.




LH002381.4                                        7
The Arrangements
         The musical arrangements often represent a creative contribution separate from the songs

that are arranged. For example, Frank Sinatra often recorded standards by the likes of George

and Ira Gershwin, arranged by the well-known arranger Nelson Riddle. In this example, the

producer of the Frank Sinatra recording would need a license to use both the Gershwin

composition and the Riddle arrangement. If the arranger is a member of the American

Federation of Musicians (“AF of M”), care must be exercised because of certain rules requiring

payments for what qualify as “new uses.”



The Performances
         The fixation of the actual performances embodied on the Master also constitute a creative

contribution, generally owned or controlled by the owner of the Master. This pertains to

everyone who performs on the Master, both vocalists and musicians. Usually, this is

accomplished by the recording agreement between the owner of the Master and the performer.

Often, for back-up musicians who are members of the AF of M, a transfer of rights is included in

the standard union contract. However, as in the case of arrangers, those union contracts are not

without strings and do provide for additional payments for so-called “new uses.”



The Producer
         The Producer and sometimes others (perhaps the engineer) make many creative

contributions to the final Master. Most of those contributions relate to choices of various

technological settings that can significantly alter the final sound. Producers normally select or

consult on the compositions to be recorded, the arranger and the supporting musicians, supervise

the recording session as well as the mixing and mastering process, and determine the order of

performance of the recorded compositions. To avoid any problems, record companies routinely

seek to provide in their agreements with the Producer that the Producer’s contributions and those

of the other participants in the production are owned by the owner of the Master.

LH002381.4                                       8
Limitations on Rights To The Master
         While the record company owns the Master, such ownership does not convey unlimited

rights to the Master’s use. Rather, the Master owner’s rights are a matter of contract between the

parties. For example, if the owner of the Master does not also own the copyright in the music

embodied in the Master, then (absent specific language and clearance), while the Master owner

would have the right to license the Master to be used as part of a movie or television soundtrack,

such license does not include synchronization rights in the music, and the licensee must obtain

the consent of the owner of the song. Thus, in order to synchronize Frank Sinatra’s recording of

Kander and Ebb’s “New York, New York” in a film soundtrack, the film company would need a

synchronization license from both the music publisher of the song and the record company which

owns the Sinatra recording. If the record company wishes to use the name and likeness of the

artist to promote the Master or its business activities in general, the agreement with the artist

should include a provision authorizing such use (although such explicit permission might not be

required for the promotion of the Master).



Reproduction Rights
         “Master recording rights” or “master use rights” are required to reproduce and distribute
a sound recording embodying the specific performance of a musical composition by a specific

artist. A potential licensee who seeks to manufacture an existing recording must contact its

copyright owner. The Copyright Act does not, however, recognize a public performance right in

sound recordings (except for digital audio transmission), so that a license is not needed to

perform the recording (in contrast to any copyrighted music embodied in the recording). Yankee

Stadium needs a BMI license to publicly perform the Sinatra recording of “New York, New

York” after Yankee ball games, but does not need a license from the owner of the Sinatra

recording.



LH002381.4                                        9
                                      New Technologies
         This Primer is not intended to provide a comprehensive discussion of the many important

changes in copyright law and music industry business practices that have occurred in response to

the Internet and other new technologies. What follows is a succinct outline of these

developments.



Public Performance Rights for Digital Audio Transmissions and Webcasting

         The Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act (DPRSRA) of 1995 created a

new right for owners of certain digital sound recordings. (See “Music Copyright Versus Sound

Recording Copyright,” above.) Under the DPRSRA, owners of copyrights in the sound

recordings covered by the Act were given exclusive "public performance" rights for the purposes

of “digital audio transmissions.” This means that an on-line music service may not be able to use

pre-recorded music covered by the Act without permission.

         Notwithstanding this new digital public performance right in sound recordings,

certain digital music services are entitled to a compulsory license to use pre-recorded music. The

Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998 provided for a statutory license that granted

“webcasters” the automatic right to use sound recordings in their non-interactive streamed

programming, sometimes referred to as "Internet radio." Downloading, which refers to making

permanent copies of music, and on-demand streaming, which permits listeners to hear particular

recordings on demand, are not within the scope of the compulsory license. Thus, those wishing

to provide digital downloads and inter-active streaming must negotiate with sound recording

copyright owners to do so.

         The Digital Millennium Copyright Act also limits the compulsory license by setting up

stringent restrictions that are intended to avoid displacement of record sales. For instance, the

compulsory license may only be secured if the webcaster does not play in any three-hour period

more than three songs from a particular album, including no more than two consecutively, or


LH002381.4                                       10
four songs by a particular artist or from a boxed set, including no more than three consecutively.

These restrictions contemplate that a listener will not use the webcasting service to create his

own custom designed loops featuring a single artist or album.


Downloading and On-Demand Streaming

         With respect to the digital downloading of sound recordings, a mechanical license is

necessary because downloading results in a new copy of a musical composition. However, a

"compulsory" license also applies to downloading or “DPDs”. The licensee is required to pay

the same license fee (currently the greater of 8 cents, or 1.55 cents per minute of playing time or

fraction thereof) required for traditional copying of musical compositions. In addition, at least

one court has found that a mechanical license is indeed necessary to digitally stream music (see

The Rodgers and Hammerstein Organization v. UMG Recordings Inc., 60 U.S. P.Q. 2d 1354

(2001)).

         Finally, playing musical compositions on the Internet is a “public performance” requiring

permission from copyright owners of the songs through ASCAP, BMI and SESAC.

Robert C. Harris, Chair
David H. Friedlander, Secretary

Alyson K. Adler                                       Victor Knapp
Michael A. Adler                                      Diane T. Krausz
Arlen M. Appelbaum                                    Eleanor M. Lackman
Corey D. Boddie                                       Teena Heejung Lee
Paul A. Chin                                          Arthur G. Levy
Timothy M. Craig                                      David Gerard Leyden
Jeffrey M. Dine                                       Rosalind S. Lichter
Yvette W. Encarnacion                                 Alon M. Markowitz
Sebastian Evans                                       Mirna E. Martinez
Carrie E. Flynn                                       Susan B. Master
Andrew J. Gerber                                      Margaret A. O'Brien
Eric S. Goldman                                       Nicole S. Page
Steven R. Gordon                                      Judith B. Prowda
Jill C. Greenwald                                     Sivan Rhodes
Alan J. Hartnick                                      Scott Jon Shagin
James T. Hausman                                      Miriam Stern
Jeffrey E. Jacobson                                   Jaime M. Wolf
Stuart Thomas Kleinman                                Michelle E. Zierler


LH002381.4                                       11
                                         References
United States Copyright Act (17 U.S.C.A. Sec. 101 et seq.).

BRABEC, JEFFREY AND BRABEC, TODD, MUSIC, MONEY AND SUCCESS: THE INSIDER’S GUIDE TO
THE MUSIC INDUSTRY (Schirmer Books 2000).

Gordon, Steven R., Clearing Music Recordings and Compositions for Use in Digital Music
Services, ENTERTAINMENT LAW & FINANCE, February, 2002.

FARBER, DONALD C. ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY CONTRACTS (Matthew Bender 1986).

KOHN, AL, AND KOHN, BOB, KOHN ON MUSIC LICENSING, THIRD EDITION (Aspen Law and
Business, 2001).

KRASILOVSKY, M. WILLIAM, AND SHEMEL, SIDNEY, THIS BUSINESS OF MUSIC, EIGHTH EDITION
(Billboard Books, 2000).

LINDEY, ALEXANDER, LINDEY ON ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLISHING AND THE ARTS (West Group
1980).

NEGOTIATING CONTRACTS IN THE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY (New York Law Journal Seminar
Press Annual Editions).

NIMMER, MELVILLE B., AND DAVID NIMMER, NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT (Matthew Bender & Co.
1998).

PASSMAN, DONALD S., ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT THE MUSIC BUSINESS (Simon &
Schuster 2000).

PRACTISING LAW INSTITUTE COURSE HANDBOOKS (PLI Annual Editions).

SCHULENBERG, RICHARD, LEGAL ASPECTS OF THE MUSIC INDUSTRY: AN INSIDER’S VIEW
(Watson-Guptill Publications Incorporated 1998).

SIEGEL, ALAN H., BREAKING IN TO THE MUSIC BUSINESS (Fireside/Simon & Schuster 1991).

SIEGEL, HOWARD, ED., ENTERTAINMENT LAW (New York State Bar Association 1990).

TAUBMAN, JOSEPH, PERFORMING ARTS, MANAGEMENT AND LAW (Law-Arts Publishers Inc.
1978).

WEILER, PAUL C., ENTERTAINMENT, MEDIA AND THE LAW (West Publishing 1998).




LH002381.4                                    12
                                        Resources
The American Society of Composers, Authors and Producers (www.ascap.com)

Broadcast Music Inc. (www.bmi.com)
The Harry Fox Agency (www.nmpa.org)

Music Publishers' Association of the United States (www.mpa.org)

Recording Industry Association of America (www.RIAA.com)

SESAC (www.sesac.com)

The Songwriters Guild of America (www.songwriters.org)

The U.S. Copyright Office (www.loc.gov/copyright)




LH002381.4                                   13
