Chapter 15: Copyright Basics 15 Copyright Basics Before you can understand what songwriting and music publishing are all about, you have to understand how copyrights work. When you deal with something intangible like a copyright (which you can’t see, feel, or smell), it’s a challenge to nail it down. Copyrights are a tremendous amount of fun—they’re squiggly little critters that, every time you think you have a handle on them, take an unexpected turn and nip you in the butt. And many of the concepts have been around since record players had cranks on the side, which makes for some interesting challenges in today’s world. BASIC COPYRIGHT CONCEPTS When you own a copyright, it’s like playing Monopoly and owning all the properties on the board. But unlike Monopoly, you’re not limited to the rents printed on the little cards. (Well, actually, there are some preset rents, but for the most part you can charge whatever the traffic will bear.) Definition of Copyright The legal definition of a copyright is “a limited duration monopoly.” Its purpose (as stated in the U.S. Constitution, no less) is to promote the progress of “useful arts” by giving creators exclusive rights to their works for a while. As you can imagine, if you created something and everybody had the right to use it without paying you, not very many people would go through the trouble of creating anything (including you and me). What’s Copyrightable? To be copyrightable, the work has to be original (not copied from something else) and of sufficient creativity to constitute a work, which is a pretty low threshold. There’s no specific test to know what’s copyrightable; it’s decided on a case-by-case basis, and it has nothing to do with length. For example, the five notes played by the spaceship in Close Encounters of the Third Kind are copyrightable because of their originality, even though they’re just five notes. We’ll talk more about this on page 330 , in connection with copyright infringement cases. How to Get a Copyright Under U.S. copyright law, as soon as you make a tangible copy of something, you have a copyright. Tangible means something you can touch, though that has been clarified in the Copyright Act to mean something that can be “perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device.” That phrase is how the government uses sixteen words to say “electronic files.” If the work is a musical composition, for example, it can simply be recorded. Once this tangible copy exists, you have all the copyright you need. Many people think you have to register in Washington to get a copyright. Not true. There are some important rights you get from registering, but securing a copyright isn’t one of them. (More on this later.) So it’s that simple. If you sing a song in your head, no matter how completely it’s composed, you have no copyright. Once you write it down or record it, you have one. If you’d like to take a few minutes right now and copyright something, I’ll wait. WHAT ARE ALL THESE RIGHTS YOU GET? When you have a copyright, you get the following rights at no extra charge. These rights are exclusive , which means that no one can do these things without your permission. (For you technical freaks, the rights are listed in Section 106 of the Copyright Act.) You get the exclusive right to: 1. Reproduce the work. For example, if you write a song, no one can record it, publish it as sheet music, put it in a movie, or otherwise copy it without your permission. (Actually, there are some exceptions, but we’ll get to those in a minute.) 2. Distribute copies of the work. Apart from the right to reproduce your song, you also control a separate right of distribution . Notice the difference between making a copy of the work (like recording a song), which is one use of a copyright (it’s a reproduction, as we discussed in point 1), and the distribution of this copy (streaming to the public, for example), which is another, separate right. 3. Perform the work publicly. With a song, this means playing it in concert venues, on the radio, on television, through a streaming service (which is also a distribution, as we just discussed), in bars, amusement parks, supermarkets, elevators (you know your career is either soaring or history when you hear your song in an elevator), or anywhere else music is heard publicly. It doesn’t matter whether the performance is live or recorded; you get to control this right. (If you’re wondering how you could ever police this or get paid, stay tuned.) 4. Make a derivative work. A derivative work is a creation based on another work. In the music industry, an example is a parody lyric set to a well-known song (what Weird Al Yankovic does). The original melody is a copyrighted original work, and once you add parody lyrics, it constitutes a new, separate work. This new work is called a derivative work because it’s “derived” from the original. Another example is a song with a sample in it, or an original arrangement or remix of a well-known song. This concept is even easier to see in other areas. Any film made from a novel is a derivative work (the novel is the original work). Another example is the Broadway musical Rent , which is a derivative work of the opera La Bohème . Anyway, you get the idea. (By the way, the original doesn’t have to be copyrighted. La Bohème is so old that its copyright long ago expired; ditto for all the Cinderella -based movies. But in these cases, the only parts of the derivative work that are protected by copyright are the newly created ones.) 5. Display the work publicly. Generally, this gives you the exclusive the right to put things like paintings and statues on public display. In the music area, about the only thing it covers are websites that display lyrics, which is also a distribution. EXCEPTIONS TO THE COPYRIGHT MONOPOLY As I said earlier, the copyright law gives you an absolute monopoly, which means it’s your bat and ball, and you don’t have to let anyone else play. If you want to write poems and throw them into the sea, so that no human being can ever see them, that’s your prerogative. You may be poor in your old age, but you’ll have entertained a lot of fish. However… Compulsory Licenses There are five major exceptions to this monopoly rule, and they’re known as compulsory licenses . A compulsory license means that you must issue a license to someone who wants to use your work, whether you like it or not. The five compulsory licenses are: 1. Cable television rebroadcast. Not really relevant to music; it’s about cable TV companies re-transmitting over-the-air TV stations. 2. Public Broadcasting System. The PBS lobbyists did a terrific job of requiring copyright owners to license works to them at cheap rates. 3. Jukeboxes. It may surprise you to know that until the 1976 Copyright Act, jukeboxes paid nothing for the right to use music. They were considered “toys” in the 1909 Copyright Act (really). Now they pay set license fees, the details of which have never been relevant to me, so I don’t know them. 4. Digital performance of records. This baby was added in 1995, then modified in 1998, and it requires the owners of recordings to allow performances of their recordings on digital radio, which also includes non-interactive streaming (radio shows on the Internet). We will talk a little about this on page 326 , and we’ll hit it harder on page 327 . 5. The use of non-dramatic musical compositions in streaming, digital downloads, and phonorecords. This last one is the most used in the music business, so we’ll do a deeper dive. It’s called a compulsory mechanical license . And it’s recently been pumped up on steroids by something called the Music Modernization Act , or MMA , which we’ll also cover. COMPULSORY MECHANICAL LICENSES To understand what the hell I’m talking about, you first need to know about mechanical royalties. Mechanical Royalties The term mechanical royalties (or mechanicals to its friends) developed in the 1909 Copyright Act and referred to payments for devices “serving to mechanically reproduce sound.” Even though devices haven’t reproduced sound “mechanically” since the 1940s, the name has stuck and the monies paid to copyright owners for the manufacture and distribution of records are still called mechanical royalties . The rights to reproduce songs in records are known as mechanical rights . The concept of a compulsory license for these mechanical rights grew out of a concern in Congress that the music industry was going to develop into a gigantic monopoly. This desire to keep copyright owners from controlling the world resulted in the compulsory license for records, which accomplishes its mission nicely. Let’s take a closer look: Compulsory Mechanical Licenses The compulsory copyright license for records is in Section 115 of the Copyright Act. Until 2018, when the Music Modernization Act (MMA) was passed, it only dealt with traditional sales of physical product and digital downloads. Because of the MMA, however, it now deals with interactive streaming as well. The streaming compulsory license gets a bit complicated, so let me first give you the parts of mechanical licensing that didn’t change under the MMA. Then I’ll let you know what your tax dollars have been up to. Section 115 says that, once a song has been recorded and released to the public, (a) the copyright owner must license the song (i.e., they have to issue a compulsory mechanical license) to anyone else that wants to use it in a phonorecord (which is a defined term in the Copyright Act, and I’ll explain it in a minute); and (b) that license can only charge a specific payment established by the law (more on this later). In other words, if you can’t (or don’t want to) get a voluntary license (meaning a license where you and the copyright owner voluntarily agree on a deal), you can invoke the compulsory license section of the Copyright Act, and the owner has to let you use the song in phonorecords for a set price. However, the owner is only required to issue a compulsory mechanical license if : 1. The song is a non-dramatic musical work; and 2. It has been previously recorded; and 3. The previous recording has been distributed publicly in phonorecords; and 4. The new recording (called a cover , or cover record , in the biz) doesn’t change the basic melody or fundamental character of the song; and 5. The cover recording is only used in phonorecords distributed to the public for private use. All of these conditions have to exist before you get a compulsory license. If you miss one, you have to beg the publisher for a license, and she can say, “Buzz off.” Let’s look at the conditions for the compulsory license: Non-dramatic Musical Work. Before you can get a compulsory license, the song must be a non-dramatic musical composition. It’s not clear what a “dramatic” musical composition is, but it’s probably a song used in an opera or musical—i.e., a song that helps tell a story. Previously Recorded. You can’t get a compulsory license for the very first recording of a song. The law allows the owner to control who gets it the first time, which is known as a first use . Also, even if the song was previously recorded, you can only get a compulsory license if that first recording was authorized by the copyright owner. The fact that someone sneaks off and records the song doesn’t trigger the compulsory license, nor does a fan posting your concert performance of an unreleased song. Public Distribution. The first recording must have been distributed to the public. This closes a loophole from the prior law. So even if the copyright owner allowed a recording to be made, if it was never released, you can’t get a compulsory license for another recording. Phonorecord Use. A compulsory license is available only for phonorecords , which are defined in the copyright law to mean audio-only recordings. This definition was the publishers’ finest lobbying accomplishment in the 1976 Copyright Act, because it excluded home video devices from the definition of phonorecords, and now it excludes video streaming. This means there’s no compulsory license for audiovisual works, and, among other things, it means that motion picture companies have to negotiate with every copyright owner for audiovisual streaming of each song. It also means the song owners are free to charge whatever rate they choose. (More on how this is done on page 225 .) No Major Changes. When you get a compulsory license, you’re allowed to arrange the song “to conform it to the style or manner of interpretation of the performance.” (This is in section 115(a)(2) of the copyright law, for you detail-oriented folk.) However, you can’t change the basic melody or fundamental character of the work. So, for example, you couldn’t write new lyrics, or add another melody. If the above conditions exist, then anyone who wants to use a song in phonorecords or streaming can do it by filing certain notices and paying a set fee called the statutory rate (it’s called a statutory rate because the rate is set by the Copyright Act, and the Copyright Act is a “statute” [meaning a law]). For physical and downloads, the statutory rate is currently the larger of (a) 12¢, or (b) 2.31¢ per minute of playing time or a fraction thereof. Thus, if a song runs five minutes or less, the rate is 12¢. However, if it’s over five minutes (even by a second or two), but not over six minutes, the rate is 13.86¢ (2.31¢ × 6 = 13.86¢). If a song is over six minutes but not more than seven minutes, the rate is 16.17¢ (2.31¢ × 7 = 16.17¢). You get the idea. The above rates, which were effective January 1, 2023, are also subject to adjustment based on the consumer price index ( CPI to its frat bros). The CPI is that government report which tells you the shocking news that things are getting more expensive. For example, if the CPI goes up 10%, the rate would move from 12¢ to 13.2¢. So the more inflation we get, the more you get for your songs. Wonderful news, except for the fact that you’ll have to use a lot of those increases to pay for bananas at $40 a pound. Ringtones (which are considered phonorecords under the compulsory mechanical license provisions) have a separate statutory rate, which is currently 24¢. That’s obviously much higher than the 12¢ physical and download rate, for historical reasons that I could give you, but since ringtones are essentially dead, and it’s not all that interesting anyway, I won’t waste the ink (or electrons, if you’re using an e-reader). Music Modernization Act In 2018, the MMA created a compulsory mechanical license for streaming. And unlike the compulsory license for physical and downloads, you can get this streaming license even if the recording hasn’t been previously released (i.e., it’s a first use and not a cover record). However, you can only get a streaming compulsory license if (a) the recording of the song was authorized by the song owner, and (b) the owner of the sound recording authorized digital distribution. Huh? If it’s already been authorized for recording and digital distribution by the owner of the song and the recording, why would you need a compulsory license? Don’t you have voluntary license? The answer is actually pretty interesting, and it’s rooted in a massive war that happened in the business. But we need a few more concepts under our belt before I can explain it, so hang on until the next chapter (on page 240 ). Can you feel the suspense building? Streaming mechanicals are WAY more complicated than physical and download mechanicals. Unlike the pennies in those prior examples, streaming mechanicals are a percentage of streaming income, and not a simple calculation. Also, these rights overlap with other rights we haven’t yet discussed. So sorry to keep doing this, but please hang on for a few more concepts and we’ll tackle the streaming mechanicals on page 238 . I promise it’ll be worth the wait. Probably… Foreign Mechanicals Other than the United States and Canada, most countries of the world use an entirely different copyright royalty system for downloads and physical goods. Mechanicals “over there” are a percentage of wholesale price, which covers all songs on the record. This means the rate has nothing to do with the length of the composition or even the number of songs. The same amount of mechanicals is paid for an album containing eight compositions that is paid for one with twelve. Also, as we’ll discuss later (on page 264 ), foreign mechanicals are usually paid to a government-mandated agency. For example, mechanicals for downloads and physical in the United Kingdom are currently 8.5% of PPD (see page 83 for what PPD is), though there are some complexities. If you’re curious, or a glutton for pain, take a look at their website, www.prsformusic.com . Finding the details is a little like navigating a Fortnite battle, but at the time of this writing you go to the home page, click on Writers/Publishers, click on MCPS (standing for Mechanical-Copyright Protection Society), look under “MCPS Royalty Sources,” and knock yourself out. The rate for physical and downloads in the rest of Europe is set by an organization called BIEM (Bureau International des Sociétés Gérant les Droits d’Enregistrement et de Reproduction Mécanique ; is that a mouthful, or what?). BIEM (pronounced “beam”) is a group of agencies in each territory that collect mechanical royalties for their affiliates. Currently, the BIEM rate is 11% of PPD but they allow some deductions, so the net rate is 8.712% of PPD. We’ll get to foreign streaming a bit later, after we talk U.S. steaming rates.