Chapter 19: Advanced Copyright Concepts 19 Advanced Copyright Concepts WHO OWNS THE COPYRIGHT? Copyright ownership is pretty easy to figure out if you sit down with your zither and knock out a smash by yourself. You, of course, are the owner, since you created it. But we lawyers wouldn’t have much fun if it were all that simple, so let me show you how we’ve managed to fuzz it up over the years. How About Two People Writing a Song Together? Suppose you and your cousin Otto write a brilliant work together. Who owns it? As you probably guessed, the two of you do. But… Who Controls the Song? Suppose you want to put the song on your next album, and Otto wants to save it until he gets a record deal. Can he stop you? The ever-scintillating Section 201(a) of the Copyright Act spells this out pretty clearly. It says that you and Otto have created a joint work . (Yes, I know what that sounds like.) When you have a joint work, either of the authors/owners can deal non-exclusively with the entire composition, subject to the obligation to pay the other person his or her share of the proceeds. That means you can give all the non-exclusive licenses you want to record companies, film companies, etc., subject to paying Otto for his share of the song. And Otto can do the same. (This is only true in the United States, by the way; not in other countries. Over there a user needs a license from both owners to use the song.) What Exactly Do You Own? How about this one: You and Otto sit down to write a song. You write only the music, and Otto writes only the lyrics. Suppose you don’t like Otto’s lyrics, so you take back your music and ask somebody else to write new lyrics. Can you do that and cut out Otto? My mentor Payson Wolff once told me that creating a joint work is like adding water to a ball of clay and squishing it. My partner Bruce Ramer uses the analogy of scrambling the white and the yolk of the egg. So, as you may be starting to guess, the law isn’t what you’d intuitively think. It says that even if two people create separate, distinct parts of a work, they each own an interest in the whole copyright , not just their own contribution. That means Otto owns half the music and half the lyrics, and so do you. So you can’t just pick up and leave each other. Even if you add new lyrics, Otto still has a percentage of the song. Does this sound like an absurd result? To some extent, yes; but if you get into dividing up works where the contributions aren’t so easily defined as music and lyrics (which is most of the time), the alternative is even more impossible. Think, for example, about all the elements that go into making a film. What part is the screenwriter’s? The director’s? The producer’s? The wardrobe designer’s? Or what about a song where three people work on the lyrics, while two work on both music and lyrics? What Makes a Joint Work “Joint”? By now you’re beginning to see that this is more complicated than it first appears. But we’re just getting warmed up. Try this one: A songwriting team consists of one person who lives in California, and another who lives in New York. The California writer, totally on her own, writes a piece of music and emails it to her friend in New York. A few days later, the guy in New York sits down and writes the lyrics. Is this a joint work? When they work totally separately, did these two people create the song together? The law says, to have a joint work, you only need an author who intends , at the time of creation, to merge his or her work with someone else’s. In other words, when the musician wrote the music in California, did she intend to have lyrics written for it? That’s certainly the case in our example, even though the lyricist and melody writer never physically got together. (It’s almost always true that a lyricist intends to merge the words with music, since he or she probably has little call for poetry readings.) So, to have a joint work, you don’t need to be in the same room (or on the same planet), and you don’t even have to know each other. As long as there’s an intent to merge the work at the time of creation, it’s a joint work whenever the rest of it comes together. If you wanna see this principle carried to extremes, get a load of this: In the 1940s, a guy named Ernie Barnett wrote the melody of a song, and his wife, Maybelle, wrote the lyrics. They sold it to a publisher who thought Maybelle’s lyrics were pretty awful (a lot of “moon” and “June,” I’ll bet). So the publisher tossed out Maybelle’s words and had a new set of lyrics written by a total stranger, George Norton. The result was a song called “Melancholy Baby.” Based on these facts, a court held that “Melancholy Baby” was a “joint work,” and that George was one of the joint creators. Even though Ol’ George came along after the song was supposedly finished, he was still a joint author because when Ernie wrote the melody, he intended to merge lyrics with it. The fact that the lyrics were ultimately written by someone Ernie never met was irrelevant. Moreover, the new lyricist had an interest in the music (although the case didn’t deal with that issue). Nice coconuts, eh? For the legal freaks, the case is Shapiro Bernstein v. Vogel , 161 F.2nd 406 (1947). WORKS FOR HIRE When Teddy Kennedy was at Harvard, he hired someone to take an exam for him. As you can imagine, it caused a pretty big stink. But guess what… The copyright law is one place where this is perfectly legal. It’s done with a work for hire (technically, in the copyright law, it’s called a work made for hire , but the industry shorthand is work for hire ). A work for hire happens when you hire someone to create copyrightable material for you. If you follow the technical formalities, the employer actually becomes the author of the work insofar as the copyright law is concerned. And when I say “the author,” I really mean THE author. It’s as if the person you hired doesn’t even exist (in the eyes of the copyright law), and indeed their name doesn’t even have to be on the copyright registration form. I suspect (but I really don’t know and would hate to disillusion myself by researching it) that the “work for hire” concept was developed to cover such things as fabric companies that print copyrighted designs on their cloth. They wanted to be sure that the company (not the backroom dork who actually designed the pattern) was the owner of the copyright. Seems reasonable enough. But for showbiz… Works for Hire in the Entertainment Industry Here’s an example of works for hire in the entertainment world. Suppose you are Walt Disney Pictures and you hire someone to write the theme for Snow White . (I picked the example of a motion picture for a particular reason, as you’ll see on page 321 .) In this situation, Walt Disney Pictures (the corporation) becomes the author of the work, and the person hired to write it disappears. Does this mean the writer won’t get his or her name listed as the writer of the song (in the film, on the charts, etc.)? Usually not; the real creator customarily gets credit. (But sometimes, for example with jingles written for radio or television commercials, a creator doesn’t.) Also, the amount of money that the real creator gets isn’t usually affected by this type of arrangement—most of the time they’re paid exactly the same money, whether or not the work is “for hire.” However, a number of important rights are drastically different in works for hire (as you’ll see later, on page 324 ). So whenever you’re creating a work for hire, be alert to the consequences. Spoiler Alert: they’re not good for you. Technical Definition Under the copyright law, a work for hire can be created in only one of two ways. They’re set out in Section 101 of the Copyright Act and are a bit technical. (You can skip to the “Duration of Copyright” section on page 322 if technical things make you squirmy. But try it first.) The two ways to get a work for hire are: 1. The work is made by an employee within the scope of employment . An example of this is the fabric designer I mentioned before. The test of whether there is “employment” is not the one used for the income tax laws, or in fact for any other type of laws. The law says that the employer must actually be “directing, or supervising the creation of the work, in a very specific way.” (The major case in this area is Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid , 490 U.S. 730 [1989], in which the Supreme Court held that a Vietnam memorial sculpture was not a “work for hire” because the people who paid to have it created didn’t exercise control over the details of the work, didn’t supply the tools, had no ongoing employment relationship, etc.) Normally (although not always) a songwriter is given a lot of latitude in his or her creation, so it would likely fail the employment test. I suppose, if a songwriter is given very specific instructions, and is supervised during the process, he or she might be considered an employee under the copyright laws. But that’s very rare. The most common works for hire in the music area are those that fall under this next section. 2. If a copyright is not created by an employee within the scope of employment, it can only be a work for hire if it meets all of the following criteria: The work must be (1) commissioned (meaning created at the request of someone, not a previously created work); (2) created under a written agreement that specifies it’s a work for hire; and (3) created for use in one of the following: (a) A motion picture or other audiovisual work. This is the most common area where songs are treated as works for hire. It includes musical scores, a song written for a film, etc. Remember, these songs do not have to be written by employees. They just need to be under a written agreement that says (1) they’re works for hire, and (2) they’re commissioned for use in an audiovisual work (meaning created for that work; not a pre-existing song that’s added to the work). (b) A collective work. A collective work is a collection of individual works, each of which is independently capable of copyright . Examples are an anthology of short stories; a magazine with a number of copyrightable articles; an encyclopedia; etc. (c) A compilation. A compilation is a work made by compiling a bunch of things, and thus it includes collective works (where the parts are separately copyrightable). However, it also includes works where the compiled materials are not separately copyrightable, such as a reference index to the Bible. (d) A translation of a foreign work. ¿Qué pasa? (e) A supplementary work , which is a work supplementing another work (clever definitions, these copyright guys, eh?). These are things like the introduction to a book. For a brief period in 1999, audio recordings were added to the categories listed above (in other words, the Copyright Act said they could be works for hire). However, the artist community went ballistic, and after a battle royale, Congress reversed itself and took recordings out. Nonetheless, record companies take the position that an album is a “collective work” and therefore think they have the right to treat recordings as works for hire anyway. We’ll talk about this in more detail on page 353 . Before we can discuss the consequences of something being a work for hire, you need a few more concepts. So plug it into your memory bank (or put a Post-it or electronic bookmark on this page if your memory is like mine), and we’ll come back to it. DURATION OF COPYRIGHT Remember that a copyright is a limited duration monopoly? So a logical question is, “How long does that copyright last?” History Prior to 1978, the United States had this bizarre copyright concept that was adopted in 1909 and not changed for almost seventy years. I tell you about it because (1) it’s still relevant for older copyrights, and (2) I had to learn it, so why shouldn’t you listen to it? The main thing to know about these old copyrights is that they used to last for a period of twenty-eight years from publication of the work. (I could spend an entire chapter on what publication means, but I’d like you to finish my book awake, so I’ll skip it. Basically, it means “distributed to the public.”) These copyrights were then renewable for an additional twenty-eight years, so the maximum copyright protection was fifty-six years. In 1976, Congress did a major, seventy-thousand-mile overhaul of the copyright laws. It was so extensive that the 1976 Copyright Act wasn’t effective until January 1, 1978, because Congress wanted to give everyone a year to study it. This new law dumped the twenty-eight plus twenty-eight nonsense. Instead, it said that the duration of copyright for works created after January 1, 1978, was the life of the author plus fifty years (which was already how the term of copyright was measured in a lot of other countries). Congress also extended the old fifty-six-year terms (for works created before January 1, 1978) by nineteen years, for a total of seventy-five years. In 1998, the congressional folk got together again to talk about copyright. In memory of congressman and croonster Sonny Bono, they slapped on another twenty years (known as the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, or as I like to think of it, “I Got You Twenty, Babe”). This act extended the copyright term for pre-1978 songs (if they were still under copyright) to a total of ninety-five years, and gave the 1978 and later copyrights a term equal to the life of the author plus seventy years. When a copyright expires, the work goes into the public domain (also called p.d. ), which means anyone can use it for free. So copyrights created in 1978 or after now last for life of the author plus seventy years. Simple, right? Well, how about: 1. A work written by two people. Whose life do you use to measure the copyright duration? 2. A work written under a phony name (called a pseudonymous work)? Or something created anonymously? How do you know whose life to check on? 3. Works for hire. Remember, the author is the employer, who could be a corporation. And some of those suckers live forever. Well, rest comfortably, because all of these have been handled. They work like this: 1. In the case of a joint work, the copyright lasts until seventy years after the death of the last survivor. So write all your songs with your five-year-old daughter. 2. Anonymous (no name) or pseudonymous (phony name) works last the sooner of ninety-five years from publication, or one hundred twenty years from creation. Creation means the first time it’s fixed in tangible form (written down or recorded). Publication , as I said, is a tricky little devil, but for our purposes just assume it means distribution to the public. 3. Works for hire are the same as anonymous. RIGHT OF TERMINATION One of the best goodies that creators got in the 1976 Copyright Law is the right of termination . The termination provisions say that even if you make a bonehead deal, the copyright law will give you a second shot—thirty-five years later. In other words, thirty-five years after a transfer, you can get your copyright back. By the way, this termination is only for the U.S. copyright. You’re stuck with whatever deal you made for the rest of the world. As it happens, the United States is the only country where you get a do-over. The exact mechanics get a bit technical, so I’ve stuck them back on page 348 , in a section for the die-hards. Termination of Works for Hire—Not So Fast, Charlie… Now you know enough to understand the consequences of something being a work for hire (see page 319 for what that is). With works for hire, there are no termination rights, because there was no transfer in the first place, and therefore no transfer to terminate. Remember, the creator never existed in the eyes of the copyright law—the person or company commissioning the work owns it as if they had created it themselves. So with works for hire, there’s no copyright coming back to you and your kiddies. Bummer. Be very aware of this consequence when you create a work for hire. PUBLIC PERFORMANCE OF RECORDINGS In most developed countries outside the United States, the artist and record company are paid a royalty every time a recording is played on the radio. (Note, we’re talking here about record company and artist payments from the public performance of recordings , which is very different from royalties that are paid to a songwriter and publisher for the public performance of musical compositions , which was always done in the United States.) These are known as Neighboring Rights , I suppose because they live next door to the mainstream sources of income, and the Brits like to spell it “Neighbouring” Rights so they can have one more useless letter than we do. Even though artists and record companies have been paid for the performance of recordings in other territories from the beginning, the United States didn’t recognize this right until 1995. In fact, as we’ll discuss later, when Congress created a sound recording copyright in 1972 to stop piracy, it went out of its way to say there was no public performance royalty. And when they finally did get around to a performance royalty in 1995, Congress limited it to digital performance of the recordings. So unlike other countries, there’s no performance money for use of the recordings in over-the-air radio broadcasting (also called terrestrial radio ). We’ll discuss this in more detail on page 327 . In foreign territories, neighboring rights monies can be really significant. That sounds like good news, except that U.S. artists aren’t usually entitled to collect them. The reason is pretty simple: Since the United States doesn’t pay foreign artists when their recordings are performed in the U.S., foreign countries don’t pay U.S. artists when their recordings are performed over there. In part, this comes from a sense of fairness, and to keep a balance of monies going in and out of the territory. But it’s also a way to make more money available to the local artists. (If U.S. artists aren’t taking money for the performance of recordings, there’s more left over for the locals. However, in some territories the record companies collect these monies if the artist aren’t eligible.) In recent years, it’s been possible for Americans to get paid for some countries, but only if you jump through the proper hoops. Those hoops vary from place to place, and a key player in this obstacle course is something called the Rome Convention (an international treaty dealing with intellectual property). If the country where you live signed the Rome Convention, you get performance monies from all the other countries that signed it. Most of the countries that signed it are in Europe and Scandinavia, though Japan and Australia also came to the party. Guess which country didn’t sign it? Right… the U.S. of A. Still, you can get some foreign monies. Portugal, Romania, Hungary, Russia, and Spain, and some hot spots like Croatia, Latvia, Bulgaria, and Slovenia, pay everybody. Germany, Italy, and Brazil pay if the record is released in a Rome Convention country within thirty days of its initial release in a non–Rome Convention territory. Because of streaming, that means almost every record qualifies these days. Starting in 2020, Americans became eligible in Canada, The Netherlands, and Ireland, though some members of the EU are objecting to this. And due to a decision by the EU Court of Justice, there’s potential to expand to the rest of the EU as well. But that’s still a ways down the road. Even if you don’t otherwise qualify, there are two possible ways to get these monies today: If you’re signed to a label based in a Rome Convention country, you are eligible. If you’re not signed to a label based in one of those territories, you can still get paid if you record (or partially record) your recordings in a Rome Convention country. (Hot tip: Canada is a party to the Rome Convention and they have great recording studios…) The place where you render your services is the key to whether you’re entitled to foreign performance money. For example, if you record your vocals in Canada, you’re golden. If all the musicians record in Canada, but you sing in Wyoming, you’re toast (though Wyoming is lovely this time of year). SoundExchange, who we’ll discuss in the next section, will collect your foreign neighboring rights for a fee generally in the range of 7%, but if you’ve got significant monies, a number of artists use SoundExchange for the U.S. and hire a neighboring rights agency to collect for the rest of the world. Examples of these agencies are Kollective Neighboring Rights (formerly Kobalt), PPL in the United Kingdom, and Downtown Neighboring Rights. Their fees are about the same as SoundExchange, but they have local offices, relationships with the collection societies in other territories, understand the rules that maximize Americans getting paid, and make sure you’re properly registered everywhere. Also, these folks sometimes pay advances. Meanwhile, back in the U.S.A… U.S. Digital Performances of Recordings In 1995, Congress amended Section 106 of the Copyright Act with something called the Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995 . Those folks in Washington sure know how to put a sexy title on something, huh? Section 106 says you get paid for performances of your recording if all of the following apply: 1. It must be a digital public performance, meaning a digital transmission rather than over-the-air AM and FM radio. In the last few years, many radio stations have converted their over-the-air signals to digital (HD radio), which is a digital signal. So it sounds like you’ll get performance monies when they play your recordings over the air, right? Well… Turns out the broadcasters have a lot of friends in Congress. In a nice little lobbying move, they managed to exclude digital over-the-air broadcasts from the definition of digital performances. The only exception is when a radio station simulcasts its signal over the Internet (meaning it streams the signal at the same time that it broadcasts over the air). In that case, you get paid for the streaming portion (but not the over-the-air part). 2. You only get paid for the digital performance of audio-only sound recordings (meaning the artist doesn’t get paid for performances of a recording in films, TV shows, or commercials). So, to break it down, the only digital performances that fall under Section 106 are audio-only digital transmissions that don’t go over the air. This includes all the music streaming services, satellite radio services (like Sirius XM), digital cable and satellite television audio music channels (e.g., Music Choice), non-interactive webcasters (both retransmissions of FCC-licensed radio stations on the Internet and originally programmed “Internet-only” services), services that stream to commercial businesses (grocery store music), streaming to mobile devices, and other assorted digital weirdos. If a broadcast qualifies for a performance royalty under this criteria, you get paid one of two ways: 1. In 1998, Congress followed up their 1995 extravaganza with the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (also known as the DMCA ). This baby set up a compulsory license for non-interactive streaming of recordings. That means, under certain conditions (which we’ll discuss in a second), the owner of a sound recording must allow a user to transmit it. If the broadcast qualifies for the compulsory license, you get the fees laid out by the Copyright Royalty Board (which I’ll give you in a second). If the use doesn’t qualify for the compulsory license… 2. Remember, as we discussed on page 218 , that a copyright owner can stop someone from using their work without permission unless the user can get a compulsory license. Because the DMCA compulsory license we just discussed is limited to non-interactive uses, an interactive digital service provider (DSP) such as Spotify, Apple Music, and Amazon has to get a voluntary license from the owner of the sound recording. Otherwise they’re out of business. That’s the big picture. Now let’s take a look at the compulsory and voluntary licenses in more depth. Non-Interactive Compulsory Licenses. How does a broadcaster qualify for a compulsory license? The rules are found in the riveting Section 114 of the Copyright Act, where there’s a whole slug of requirements that boil down to making the broadcaster act like a non-interactive over-the-air radio station with even more restrictions. For example, they can’t announce their playlist in advance, there are limits on how many songs of a particular artist they can play in any three-hour period, there is a limit on the number of songs from a particular album in a three-hour period, and stuff like that. If a broadcaster qualifies for a compulsory license, they pay statutory license fees (meaning rates set by the statute) to an outfit called SoundExchange . SoundExchange is a nonprofit organization whose board is made up of record company people, artists, and artist representatives. Essentially, it acts like ASCAP and BMI, meaning it collects fees from all the users, deducts its costs, and pays the balance to its members. Except, of course, that it’s dealing with the performances of recordings instead of songs. SoundExchange collects substantial monies; in 2022, it collected roughly $1.1 billion. After deducting its costs, SoundExchange divvies up the dough as follows: 50% to the record companies, 45% to the featured artists, and 5% to a fund controlled by the American Federation of Musicians (for non-featured musicians) and AFTRA (for nonfeatured vocalists) (see page 193 for who AFM and AFTRA are). The artist monies come to you directly from SoundExchange, not through your label, so they can’t be used to recoup any advances or costs. Thank your representatives in Congress. The rates are incredibly complex. They vary with whether the broadcaster is a commercial webcaster (an FCC-licensed station or other webcaster that puts its signal on the Net), an educational webcaster (like a college radio station), or a non-commercial webcaster (NPR, a charity, and the like). Also, within the commercial category, there’s a distinction between subscription-based webcasters and ad-supported (free to the user) webcasters. Got all that? Good, because there’s more. At the higher end, there are SDARS , which sounds like a lung disease epidemic but in fact means satellite digital audio radio services (the only one is Sirius XM); BES , meaning business establishment services , who pump music into restaurants, hotels, and tropical fish stores; CABSAT , standing for cable/satellite services , who deliver music over cable or satellite to your TV or set-top box; and PES , which means pre-existing subscription services that were in existence prior to July 31, 1998, like Sirius XM and Music Choice. The PES folks were in business when Congress changed the law in 1998, and they had already set up their business models around the old set of rules. Because of this (and because they have strong lobbyists and lawyers), they got a senior citizen discount and have been allowed to continue paying a lower rate. Which in some cases is seriously less than newer competitors who provide the same service. This lower-rate group includes the massive Sirius XM, so the record companies aren’t exactly thrilled. But this is about to change. As we discussed on page 248 , under the Music Modernization Act, the new standard for all Section 114 licenses (which includes PES) is what would be paid by a “willing buyer–willing seller.” Accordingly, as new rate hearings come along, the old guys will eventually pay market rates. But this will take several years to work its way through the system. The rates are fractions of pennies for each performance, and if you really want to know the details (though I can’t imagine why), head over to SoundExchange’s website ( www.soundexchange.com ). By the way, I just gave that a whirl and couldn’t easily find the rates, so I did a search for “Sound Exchange” + “rates” which brought it up. Other than National Public Radio, there’s a minimum per year for each service of $1,000 per channel or station, with a cap of $100,000. These minimums are advances against the per-performance fees. Voluntary Licenses. If a performance doesn’t fall within the statutory license (primarily this means performances on interactive services and video services), then as we noted, the record company charges whatever the traffic will bear. In other words, this is a voluntary license between the record company (the owner of the recording) and the DSPs. Under these voluntary license deals, the DSPs pay the record companies a percentage of their revenue, as we discussed on page 144 . But unlike the compulsory license, where the record company and artist are paid separately by SoundExchange, all the money under voluntary licenses goes to the record company, and the artists get their royalties based on it. So not only is the artist’s cut usually lower than the 45% under SoundExchange (50% minus the union 5%), the money is available for recoupment of advances and costs under the record deal. To Interact or Not to Interact? There are some legally interesting in-between types of services that are arguably interactive and arguably non-interactive. For example, Pandora lets you tell them what kind of music you like, then they customize a stream for you. You can also tell them whether or not you like each song, and the more feedback you give them, the better they get at pleasing you with their choices (at least in theory). So you sort of control the content, but not exactly—you can’t tell them to play a specific song at a specific time. But you can shape what’s coming at you. The record companies argued that this made these services interactive, and therefore they had to get a voluntary license (which is much more expensive than a non-interactive compulsory license). The services had a very different opinion, saying they were non-interactive and therefore entitled to a compulsory license. This led the major record companies to sue a company called Launchcast (which had a service similar to Pandora’s) for copyright infringement. All the record companies settled this case except Sony, who took it to trial in New York. The trial court ruled in favor of Launchcast, saying their service wasn’t interactive, and Launchcast won the appeal as well. So for now, these services are non-interactive. However, some of the DSPs offer a mid-tier service (priced in between non-interactive and interactive), which has more interactivity, such as the ability to repeat songs, hear some material offline, maybe see the songs coming up in advance, etc.). They can’t get a compulsory license when they offer these features, so they had to go to the record labels and get a voluntary license. These deals look just like the interactive services deals; meaning they pay the labels a percentage of their revenue in the mid 50% range. This percentage, however, is applied to the lower fee charged for the mid-tier services (as opposed to the full interactive subscription fee for customers that get the fully interactive service). WHAT HAPPENS WHEN SOMEONE RIPS OFF YOUR COPYRIGHT? When someone uses a part of your song without permission, they infringe your copyright. And there have been a lot of high-profile copyright infringement cases in the music area over the last few years, some of the most notable being the “Blurred Lines” decision, followed by the “Stairway to Heaven” case, and then the “Dark Horse” case. (For the legal freaks, the cases are Williams v. Gaye , 895 F.3d 1106 (9th Cir. 2018) [“Blurred Lines”], Skidmore v. Led Zeppelin , 952 F.3d 1051 (9th Cir. 2020) [“Stairway to Heaven”], and Gray v. Hudson , 28 F.4th 87 (9th Cir. 2022 [“Dark Horse”].) Basically, as with every other copyright infringement lawsuit throughout history, they turned on the same question: Did you steal my song? If you think someone ripped off your song, you can sue them for it. But there are quite a few hurdles you have to jump over before you can back a truck up to their house and fill it with money, lamps, and rugs. Here’s the story: 1. First, before you can file suit, you have to either: Be the copyright owner, or Have an exclusive license of the rights that are being infringed, or Be what’s called a beneficial owner , which means you sold someone your copyright in exchange for royalties, or Be a nutcase, but have $400 and know where to find the courthouse. (Unfortunately, my clients have seen a number of these.) 2. Assuming you’re one of those, you then have to register your copyright with the Copyright Office (more about that on page 354 ) before you can file a lawsuit for infringement of a U.S. work. (Foreign works get a pass, since there’s no registration in other countries. It’s a uniquely ’merican idea.) You can only file suit for copyright damages within three years after the infringement . So if they stopped using the infringing materials more than three years ago, you can’t sue them. If the infringement is continuing (for example, they’re still streaming records with your song), you can file suit more than three years after the first infringement, but you only can recover damages based on monies earned during the three years before filing. In other words, if you don’t register your copyright and sue within three years from the first infringement, you can’t go all the way back to get money out of the thief. Some courts have held that the three years don’t start until you either knew or should have known about the infringement (a concept called delayed discovery ). In other words, if you never knew about the infringement, or couldn’t reasonably have known about it, you can get damages all the way back to the first infringement, even if it was twenty years earlier. However, there’s a cloud over this sunshine. The Supreme Court seemed to say (but not 100% clearly) that the three years starts from the date of first infringement even if you didn’t and couldn’t have known about it. (The case is Petrella vs. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc ., 134 S.Ct. 1962 (2014).) Because this opinion wasn’t 100% clear, however, some lower courts still use the delayed discovery rule. To date it hasn’t been decided by an appellate court, so feel free to give it a whirl. There is also a recent case concerning registration that affects all this, but I’ve stuck it back on page 355 because it’s a bit more technical. 3. Okay. You’ve registered and filed, what do you have to do to win? 4. The first thing you have to prove is that the sleazeball actually copied your work. Since most infringers don’t say “Yeah, I copied your song” (though some do, as you’ll see), you have to prove they did. Maybe someone saw them copying your song. Or maybe they recorded their writing sessions and those recordings show that they were thinking of your song at the time. Or maybe my dog will learn to play the bagpipes. In other words, you almost never have any evidence of copying. Usually, you have to prove they copied your song by showing the court that your work and theirs have a striking similarity . Striking similarity is a legal term that means the two songs are so much alike that it can only be explained by copying. And of course this also rarely happens (though it can). Most thieves are smart enough to change the work a bit. Now what? Even if there’s no striking similarity between your song and theirs, you’re not dead yet. You can still win if you prove that (a) there is substantial similarity (this is a lower standard than “ striking similarity”) between your work and theirs, and (b) the infringer had access to your work. There’s no bright line for what substantial similarity means, and because each case is unique, there’s not much guidance. The courts say it means more than “insubstantial” (duh), and more than “insignificant.” If what was taken was really minimal (but of course attorneys have to use fancier words than that, so it’s called de minimis ), there’s no infringement. If it was substantially similar and not de minimis, it’s an infringement. The second part of the test is access . Access is a legal term that means they had a reasonable way to hear your song and rip it off. For example, someone gave your song to an artist, hoping they’d record it, and that artist later wrote a song that was substantially similar to yours. In the early days of the Internet, some courts assumed there was access if your song was posted on the Web, even if you only had twelve hits. But that’s been cut way back. With billions of postings on YouTube, the access test now requires that your song be very widely known (for example, in the top 50 on a credible record chart), or that it was in a genre that the thief listened to a lot, or in a section of the Internet where the thief went repeatedly. Things like that. By the way, you don’t need to prove there was access if you can show striking similarity (the test we first discussed) between your song and theirs. That’s because of a concept called presumed access , which means a court will “presume” the thief had access to your song if the two works are strikingly similar. However, if they’re only substantially similar, you need to show access. 5. Okay, you’ve shown access and substantial similarity. Do you win? Maybe… Even if there’s substantial similarity and access, there’s no infringement if the infringer can prove they independently created their song. In other words, if someone writes a substantially similar song all on their own, without first hearing your song, there’s no copyright infringement—no matter how close the two songs are. A particularly interesting case in this area involved George Harrison, who was found guilty of copying the song “He’s So Fine” in his song “My Sweet Lord.” George claimed he created “My Sweet Lord” without even thinking about “He’s So Fine,” and what’s unusual about this case is that the court actually believed him. But he still lost. This case created a principle we call unconscious copying . That means he copied without being aware of it, because the song was very well known and somewhere buried in his brain. (For the legally inclined, the citation is Bright Tunes Music Corp. v. Harrisongs Music, Ltd ., 420 F. Supp. 177, 1976.) 6. Okay, you proved that this scumbag had access and didn’t create his work on his own. Now you’re a ways down the track. How far? The next test is whether or not the material he copied is protected by copyright. In other words, you have to prove what he copied from your song was original to you. This means two things: (1) you have to show that you created the material yourself (rather than copying it from someone else) and (2) what you wrote has some degree of creativity. For example, regarding (1), if you borrowed your melody from Mozart note for note, you didn’t create anything, and the thief is free to use that melody. Or regarding (2), if your lyrics were “I love you with all my heart. You mean everything to me,” they’d not only be boring, but also so commonplace that they don’t have enough creativity to be copyrightable. (If you’re into reading legal opinions about this concept, check out the “Stairway to Heaven” and “Dark Horse” cases mentioned on page 331 .) A very significant case about originality is the Rentmeester case, where a photographer took the original picture of Michael Jordan in his famous jumpman pose. That’s the one where he’s leaping in the air with his legs split and his arm extended holding a basketball. (I’d be happy to print it here, but I don’t want to get sued for copyright infringement. Google it.) Nike liked what he did and licensed copies of the photo from Rentmeester for very limited use. Then they decided to use the image in a major way, but instead of paying the photographer for more rights to use the picture, they staged their own photo of Michael Jordan in the same pose. Mr. Rentmeester was not pleased. So he sued Nike, claiming they’d infringed the copyright in his photo by duplicating the pose. And Mr. Rentmeester was even less pleased when the court tossed out his case, saying that he couldn’t claim copyright infringement. I don’t know anything about ballet, but apparently Jordan’s pose was inspired by a dance move known as a grand jeté (sounds more like a jacuzzi part to me, but whatever). At any rate, grand jetés existed long before Rentmeester did. Also, the Nike photo was in a different location, meaning it had a different background and a different hoop. So even though Nike admitted copying the concept, the court (the law court, not the basketball court) decided there was no infringement because none of Rentmeester’s original elements were used. (This case also illustrates the principle that you can’t copyright an idea, just the expression of that idea.) So the score is Nike 1, Rentmeester 0. (If you want to relive his sorrow, it’s all spelled out in Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc ., 883 F.3d 1111 [2018].) The fact that the dance move preexisted the Rentmeester photo leads us nicely into another aspect of copyright infringement known as prior art . That means, as the name implies, that you can’t claim you created something that existed before you created your work. This is an especially important element in music cases, as there are only twelve notes in a scale and they’ve been used a lot. In other words, if the thief copied a phrase in your song that’s the same as a phrase used in forty songs that existed way before yours (prior art), you can’t claim enough originality to sustain an infringement suit. Another aspect of this issue is whether the infringed materials were just following a well-worn path of prior art. In other words, if the infringed material has to naturally flow from the genre or idea of the material, it’s not protectable. For example, in the film area, if you make a space movie, it’s not protectable just to have spaceships, aliens, ray-gun battles, and things like that. And in music, there are standard blues chord progressions that you pretty much have to use (if you want to write the blues, anyway). Or if your song is a waltz, it has to be in 3/4 time. 7. So let’s say you’re through those hoops. You’ve shown that the material they stole from you is original and protected. What’s next? Wheel out the operating table, because the court will now dissect your work. If your song has some original elements and some that aren’t original, they’re going to toss out everything that isn’t original. That’s because you can only sue over stuff that’s protected by copyright, meaning original material created by you. For example, if you wrote new lyrics to the tune of “Old MacDonald,” you couldn’t sue over the melody, just over your new lyrics. Or if you wrote something using the standard blues progression, you couldn’t sue over that chord structure, just your words and melody. This dissecting is done very clinically. Experts make up charts of both songs, compare recordings of your song to recordings of the other song, and then argue about what it all means. When they’re done yelling, the court decides which parts are protected and which aren’t. They then compare your protected parts against the thief’s work to see if there is substantial similarity between the two (the test I mentioned earlier). If there is, we’re on to the next hurdle. If not, you’re off see the Rentmeester. 8. Well… you’ve shown that they copied protected material from you, and that their work is substantially similar to your protected work, and it’s not de minimis. Are we there yet? Are we there yet? No, honey, but I’ll let you know when we are and I’ll buy you an ice cream. The tests above are all reasonably cut-and-dried. The way that the experts look at the words, notes, chord progressions, prior art, etc., is an objective test, based on the bones of the two works. Sort of like taking two pieces of paper with similar writing, putting one on top of the other, and holding them up to the light to see how much alike they are. Once you get past that, you arrive at the next test, which is a subjective one. In essence, that means, “Does it sound like an infringement?” Even if it looks very close on the objective scale, would someone listening to it think it came from your work? Or vice-versa; the two works may not look so close in an objective comparison, but may sound very much alike. If the answer is yes, they sound alike, do you win? Probably, but… 9. Even if the works sound alike and you prove the thief stole a protectable part of your work, the infringer may argue that his song is something called fair use . And if that’s true, you lose. Fair use is a complicated (though pretty interesting) area of the law that says you’re allowed to use parts of someone’s work for certain purposes without permission (and without paying them). In other words, if you meet the legal tests, so that you’ve made a “fair use” of the work, there’s no copyright infringement. The fair use criteria are in Section 107 of the Copyright Act, but they’re only a general description (as you’ll see). The reality is that every fair use case is very fact-specific. Which of course makes lawyers happy, because we get to argue about which foot will fit into the Cinderella slipper. Here’s what the Copyright Act says: A fair use is not a copyright infringement if it’s “for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research.” It then lists things you should consider in deciding whether you went over the line into infringement territory. However, it says the factors determining fair use include the things on their list, which means you can look at other stuff as well. (See what I mean about it being a “general description”?) Anyway, here’s the list in Section 107. To determine if there’s a fair use, you need to look at: (1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether it’s a commercial use or nonprofit educational purposes. It’s okay if there’s some commercial aspect involved, but the more there is, the stricter the test. (2) the nature of the copyrighted work (the one that’s been copied). The courts have distinguished between creative works (songs, novels, paintings, etc.) and factual works, such as nonfiction books and directories. Creative works have more protection, as you’d expect. (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole. The general principle is that the more that’s used, the less likely it’s fair use. However, there’s an argument that using even a small portion that is the “heart” of a work could go over the line. (4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work. The question here is whether the new work would be a substitute for the original in the marketplace and therefore financially hurt the original. For example, a Saturday Night Live parody sketch of a movie isn’t going to hurt the market for the movie; in fact, it most likely helps. But a parody song that uses most of the elements of the original song might in fact be a substitute for the original. As you can gather, fair use is very fact-specific, meaning it’s hard to know with certainty whether you’ve got one. An easy example would be a professor at a nonprofit college who copies a few paragraphs from a book into a classroom handout (clearly a fair use) versus someone who copies an entire book and sells it to the students (clearly not). In between, things get hazy. A major issue that’s come out of the courts in determining fair use is whether the use is transformative . This concept started with a music case that went all the way to the Supreme Court, over 2 Live Crew using the lyrics of “Pretty Woman” in a rap song. The background is that they tried to license the song, got turned down, then went ahead anyway. So the owners of the song sued them for infringement. To the industry’s surprise, the Supreme Court held there was no infringement because the new use parodied the original song by satirizing the idea of what was “pretty,” and used the song in an entirely different setting. The case is Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music , 510 U.S. 569 (1994). Since then, there have been a number of cases on transformation, including some fun things like superimposing Leslie Nielsen’s head on the pregnant body of Demi Moore (that was held to be transformative and a fair use). If you want to see an assortment of goodies to better understand the concept, Google “transformative use copyright cases.” To make this even more fun, the courts in various parts of the country have a difference of opinion. Two of the circuit courts held that using copyrighted material to create another work is transformative and fair use, but one circuit said it’s an infringement because it’s just a derivative work (see page 217 for what “derivative work” means). Unless and until the Supreme Court weighs in, we’ll continue to live in Fuzzy Land. Okay, honey, we’re there. What flavor ice cream do you want? I Won!… Now What? If you prove someone infringed your copyright, what do you get? Some of this is peculiar to the copyright (and also trademark) world. Here’s how it works: 1. You get the fair market value of the use they made. For example, if they rip off your song in a commercial, and that use of the song is worth $25,000 in a marketplace deal, you can get $25,000. 2. You can recover the infringer’s profits. If the sleazeball made a profit using your work, you can recover whatever share of his profits are attributable to the infringement, which may be more than the fair market value of the usage. (If you pick this remedy, you don’t also get fair market value.) 3. You can get an injunction. That means the court enjoins (stops the infringer from using) the infringing work. If they continue to use it anyway, they’re subject to substantial fines, and sometimes even jail. 4. You can recover statutory damages. Statutory damages are a real copyright original. This is where you can’t prove actual damages—for example, your infringer was not only a thief, but also a bungling businessman, and he lost money with your rip-off. Or maybe his profits are so well hidden that you can’t find them. In this case, if you registered the copyright before the infringement commenced, the court can give you anywhere from $750 to $30,000 for a single work (this is per work infringed, not the number of copies actually made; for example, streaming a song one million times is still only one act of infringement). The judge can raise this to $150,000 if it’s a willful (intentional) infringement, and can lower it to $200 for an “innocent” infringement. 5. The court can order destruction or seizure. The court can grab, or make the scumball destroy, all the infringing copies. This is also not a common remedy outside the copyright area. 6. If the infringement is willful, there are criminal penalties. An interesting bit of history is that the Marx Brothers stole some poor schlub’s copyrighted routine for a radio show and were convicted of criminal copyright infringement. 7. You can get your costs. You can get back your court costs and, to a limited extent, you can recover your attorney’s fees . The latter is unusual, because you usually don’t get attorney’s fees even if you win a lawsuit. A relatively recent development is that we now have a Copyright Small Claims Court, which as the name implies, is a place for itty-bitty infringements. The maximum recovery is $30,000, and the statutory damages we just discussed are limited to $15,000 (rather than $30,000 to $150,000). Also, there’s no recovery of attorney’s fees, unless the suit was filed in bad faith, and you can’t get an injunction or destruction of goods (see the prior section) without both sides agreeing. You can recover costs, but they’re capped at $15,000. This new court was set up by the Copyright Alternative in Small-Claims Enforcement Act of 2020 (the CASE Act). It’s a three-judge panel, called a tribunal (get it? “tri” equals “three,” like a tricycle), who are knowledgeable in copyright issues. You have to use these folks; you can’t have a jury. Unlike federal court, you don’t need to have a lawyer representing you, though you can. The proceedings are informal; there’s generally no personal appearances. Discovery (meaning asking the other side about their case and requesting documents) is all done in writing, and there are no rules of evidence or expert witnesses. There’s also no trial. The tribunal just looks at the evidence and decides who wins. Going to small claims court is entirely voluntary, meaning both sides have to agree. In other words, if the person you sue wants to take the case to federal court, they can. But there are reasons why they may not. For example, their damages are capped in small claims court, but they aren’t in federal court, so the risk is much greater there. Also, if the case is small enough, they may leave it in small claims court because it will be more expensive to hire lawyers and go through the formal proceedings of a federal court. I mean, why make a federal case out of it…? (I heard that groan). ARTIFICAL INTELLIGENCE AND MONKEY SELFIES There are a lot of issues these days about music (and other materials) created by artificial intelligence ( AI ). The creative programs are known as generative artificial intelligence , and they’re cranking out some fascinating copyright questions. We talked about AI’s dilution effect on human-created music on page 143 , but now you have enough knowledge to take a deeper dive. You may want to hold your nose for more reasons that just the depth of the water. AI programs can now do a pretty good job of creating music (as well as images, stories, and all sorts of other goodies). For example, you could ask it to create spa music, and in a few hours, you’ll have enough for twelve thousand massages. But if you thought the ownership of copyright issues we previously discussed were complicated, wait’ll you get a load of this one. Here’s the key copyright question : Who’s the author of an AI work? The choices would seem to be (a) the person who created the AI program, (b) the person who told the program what to do (“I want a polka band to play funeral music with the Juilliard string quartet”), (c) all of the above, or (d) no one. What do you think? Well, this area of the law is still finding its sea legs, so your guess is as good as everyone else’s. But so far, (d) (no one) is winning. Let me explain how we got there. It’s been established in U.S. law for a while that you can’t have a copyright without human creativity. In 1997, the Ninth Circuit Federal Court of Appeals dealt with a case by the Urantia Foundation, a religious group whose sacred text was written by “non-human spiritual beings” who used a human to channel the messages and write down the words. Someone outside Urantia decided to publish their text, and the Urantians were not pleased, so they sued for copyright infringement. Unfortunately, the spirits weren’t with them in the lawsuit and the court said that divine beings can’t be authors, only humans can. So no copyright. For more details, check out Urantia Foundation v. Kristen Maaherra , 114 F.3d 955, 957–59 (9th Cir. 1997), or wait for the movie on Netflix (just kidding about the movie). Next came an even more fun situation, the Case of the Monkey Selfie. Naruto was a seven-year-old crested macaque (not that I’d know a crested macaque from a non-crested one, nor in fact would I know a macaque from a baboon). Naruto lived on the island of Sulawesi, Indonesia, and David Slater was a wildlife photographer who went there to take pictures of the monkeys. One day, David left his camera unattended and Naruto came by. He grinned for the camera while pressing the shutter button. The result was a close-up selfie that Slater put in a book, and Naruto sued him for copyright infringement. Yep, you read that right. The monkey sued for copyright infringement. Well, Naruto didn’t actually bring the lawsuit himself; he probably didn’t care as long as he had a good supply of fruit, crabs, and insects. The case was brought by PETA, the world’s largest society for protection of animals, on behalf of Naruto. Urantia’s non-human spirits weren’t with Naruto either. The court dismissed his case on technical grounds, namely that PETA didn’t have the right to bring the suit, but it also said that non-humans can’t create copyrights. (If you want a play by play, the case is Naruto v. Slater , No. 16-15469 (9th Cir. 2018). Here’s what Naruto looks like (in case you happen to be in Sulawesi and want to say Hi). I can reproduce this image because I know Naruto and Slater can’t sue me. Image courtesy of Monkeys Can’t Copyright Selfies, Inc . And now to AI. There are no decided cases on this yet, but in 2018, and again in 2022, the Copyright Office refused to register works created by AI. A man named Steven Thaler had an AI program that ran on a machine he called “the Creativity Machine.” Thaler had the machine create a two-dimensional image, then he tried to register it with the Copyright Office, claiming it was a work for hire. In addition, he argued that the requirement of human authorship is unconstitutional. The Copyright Office disagreed. First, based on the above cases and others, they said there needs to be a human author. Second, they said it can’t be a work for hire because that can only be created by a binding legal agreement, and the Creativity Machine can’t enter into contracts. Also, they said work for hire only speaks to copyright ownership, not whether the work is copyrightable. And to be copyrightable, the author has to be human. They also said that Thaler didn’t specify what creativity he himself contributed in telling the program what to do. (If you want more detail, here’s a link to the Copyright Office’s letter rejecting Thaler’s registration: https://www.copyright.gov/rulings-filings/review-board/docs/a-recent-entrance-to-paradise.pdf .) So no human, no copyright. Or as Naruta would say, “oo-ah, eek-eek, aww.” However, refusal to register is not the same as a court ruling. In essence, the Copyright Office is punting this issue to the courts to decide, and Thaler, who didn’t go quietly into the night, is currently suing the Copyright Office over this question. More recently, Kris Kashtanova submitted a graphic novel called Zarya of the Dawn to the Copyright Office. Kris got a copyright registration for the work, but the Copyright Office later found out that they (Kris is nonbinary) only wrote the text and had AI create the images. The Copyright Office then held hearings and revised the registration. In the end, the Copyright Office registered the text (written by the very human Kris) but said the images could only be protected as a “compilation.” As we discussed on page 321 , you can get a compilation copyright for arranging and selecting non-copyrighted works. Since the AI generated images had no human authorship and therefore no copyright, Kris could only claim copyright in how they were compiled. In other words, there is a copyright registration for the selection and arrangement of the images, but no copyright in the individual images. There are arguments why AI works should be copyrightable, at least in some cases. For example, in Thaler, there was nothing in his application saying that he input any creativity into his AI machine. And it makes sense that if human input was really generic—like “Create an image of a wrestling match”—there’s no originality. Suppose, however, that you put in some things like, “Create a wrestling match between Vladimir Putin and Abraham Lincoln, each dressed in leopard skins, on a rooftop in Mumbai, where everyone in the audience is purple.” Not sure why anyone would want that, but hey, it’s kinda creative. Kinda… Is that enough human creativity to qualify? Or in the music area, what if you write the melody for a song and ask the AI to add lyrics? If you don’t describe the lyrics, under the current state of the law, you would only have the copyright in your music. But if you were pretty specific about the lyrics, could you get some protection? Maybe? There is also precedent with David Cope, who created two albums with the assistance of a computer and was able to get copyright protection by showing that the AI was only a part of his creation. That worked because he apparently had enough human input. A related copyright issue concerns the AI programs themselves. They need to be “trained” by ingesting massive amounts of material, which includes copyrighted works. Does that violate the copyright law? Is the AI’s output an unlicensed creation of a derivative work? (See page 217 for what a derivative work is.) There are already lawsuits on behalf of folks (like Getty Images) whose material was ingested, claiming just this. Will they win? Or is it a fair use, since the work is transformative? Probably didn’t help that the AI’s product in one case included a blurry Getty watermark… At the bottom of this is a policy issue that in theory should be decided by Congress (not that they can decide much of anything these days). Should non-human creativity be copyrightable? If so, under what circumstances? And who should own those copyrights? The person creating the AI? The person telling it what to do? Both? If both, who controls the copyright? Do you have to go to the AI creator for permission every time you want to use the work? What if the AI work infringes on someone else’s material? Who’s responsible for that? By the way, countries outside the U.S. may not be so precious about the human element. Apparently, Thaler registered his image in Australia and South Africa as a patent (the protection you get for inventing something), listing the AI as the inventor and Thaler as the owner. He also tried the same thing in the UK, but as I’m writing this, a UK court ruled that a machine can’t be an inventor, so they denied the patent. There’s also a related issue on the recorded music side that hasn’t yet come to life. Turns out there are only a limited number of countries that have copyrights in sound recordings (we’ll talk about those in the next chapter. but basically it means copyrights in the recording , as opposed to copyrights in the song ). They have sound recording copyrights in places with an English tradition, like the UK, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and some West Africa countries. To get a sound recording copyright there, you need an author and originality. However, in all of the EU and other places, they don’t have sound recording copyrights. Instead, they protect labels and performers with Neighboring Rights (we discussed these on page 324 ; to simplify, Neighboring Rights allow you to get paid for the distribution and performance of the recordings). But unlike a copyright, there’s no requirement of human creativity for Neighboring Rights. So AI recordings would be protected in those places, even if they were just bird sounds. Or monkey sounds… This protection goes to the record company, performer, and producer, and it’s not clear who would be the “performer” in AI, so it might just be the “producer,” which would mean the actual producer and the record company. Also, note that Neighboring Rights don’t extend to the songwriter. So you could end up with something that is protected as a recording, but there’s no copyright in the song. Just as I’m writing this (every time I think it’s done, something new happens…) there’s been a lot of press about celebrity soundalike recordings created by AI, such as a track that mimicked Drake and the Weeknd. In that case, the song was also created by AI, so as we discussed, there may be no copyright in any of it. But imitating celebrities also raises issues beyond copyright, such as a potential trademark infringement by using their names (though if it’s clearly identified as not being the celebrity, the law isn’t 100% clear on this), and also the right of someone to own their name and likeness for commercial purposes, which is a right under some state and foreign laws. The proliferation of AI music is also a concern because it dilutes the streaming money that would go to human artists who have spent a lot of time and money honing their talent and building a career (we discussed dilution on page 143 ). If there’s a lot of AI music for which no one gets royalties, and it reduces what the artists and labels get, there will be some very unhappy campers. In sum, there are no clear answers (other than what’s above, which is that there’s no copyright today), but that may not be the final word. This area should get very interesting over the coming years (or weeks), as AI becomes more prevalent and more sophisticated. Stay tuned, sports fans. If you’re on the Advanced Overview Track and are in a group, go to Part IV (Chapter 21) on page 361 . If you’re on the Advanced Overview Track and you’re not in a group, go to Part V (Chapter 23) on page 389 . Experts , keep rollin’.