Chapter 17: Even More Publishing Income 17 Even More Publishing Income Now let’s take a look at other kinds of publishing income: synchronization, print, foreign monies, and other assorted goodies. And along the way, we’ll hit controlled composition clauses. You won’t want to miss that one. SYNCHRONIZATION AND TRANSCRIPTION LICENSES As we discussed in connection with recordings, on page 152 , a synchronization (sync) license is a license to use music in “timed synchronization” with visual images. This concept applies equally to songs, such as when a song is used in a motion picture, a television program, a commercial, an audiovisual streaming, a video game, a virtual concert in the Metaverse, etc. As with recordings, it doesn’t include radio, podcasts, or audio-only commercials (since they’re not synchronized with visuals). Those licenses are called transcription licenses . Fees The fees for synchronization licenses are really all over the board, and they vary with exactly how the song is used, which media you want, how long you want to use it, and the importance of the song. The budget of the production is also a factor—fees for a big budget, major studio film are much more than those for an indie film; an established TV show pays more than a new one; and all of those pay more money than a purely Internet webisode. Also, keep in mind that this chapter is only talking about fees for the song . If the recording is also being used, there’s a separate fee for that, which is almost always an equal amount (exceptions, for instance, are situations like an iconic song that’s re-recorded by an unknown artist; in that case, the song usually gets more than the recording). An example of the lowest-end fee would be a ten-second background use of an unknown song in a television show, maybe being played on a jukebox while the actors are talking and ignoring it. A high-end example would be an on-camera, full-length performance of a well-known song in a major studio’s high-budget film. And when we get into the realm of commercials, the fees go even higher. Here’s an idea of the range. These are very general and can swing widely in either direction. As I said, sync quotes are unique and fact-specific. They depend on the usage, the importance of the song and the artist, the mood the publisher is in, etc. 1. Motion pictures. Major Studios. Motion picture sync licenses for a major studio film can run in the range of $25,000 to $50,000 (for very minor usage of a song that’s not particularly well known) to over $100,000. Main title usages (meaning over the opening credits) are generally from $100,000 to $500,000, and end title usages are less, in the range of $50,000 to $100,000 (why pay as much for a song that plays while everybody’s walking out of the theater or clicking off the streaming app?). The end title song fees may also be lower if there’s more than one song over the credits, which happens these days. Of course, if it’s an incredibly hot, recent hit song, and the film company is salivating over it, these figures can get very high into six figures, sometimes even more. For these fees, the film companies want more than just the right to use the song in the movie. They also want in-context uses. In-context means using the song apart from the film with the same visual images that accompany it in the film. For example, if your song is used in the film while lovers stroll down a beach looking lovingly at each other, and that same scene is in a commercial for the film, that’s an in-context use. The primary in-context uses are for trailers (longform ads for the movie), clips, and promotions (like excerpts on talk shows while the film’s stars are interviewed). Publishers want to limit the in-context licenses to trailers only (meaning no ads or other promotions that don’t use the full trailer), but they’ll give more rights if they get more money. Studios often want the rights to out-of-context uses, which are, not surprisingly, the opposite of the in-context uses we discussed in the preceding paragraph. In other words, out-of-context means using the music differently from the way it’s used in the film. For example, playing the song in a television ad while showing another scene from the movie. Out-of-context also includes things like a featurette (short films showing behind-the-scenes footage that was taken while the film was being made; this is also called a making-of ). You should get more money for out-of-context uses, generally in the range of about $50,000 to $100,000, but it could be much more if it’s a big song. By the way, studios sometimes license songs that aren’t in the movie for out-of-context uses; essentially, that’s licensing the song into a commercial for the movie. Those prices run about the same, though if the song is also in the movie, sometimes there’s a reduction. 2. Independent Films. For low-budget, independent films, the deals get much more creative. Funny how things always get more creative when someone doesn’t have any money. The fees are of course much lower, at least initially (as we’ll discuss), and the price also depends on the kind of indie film involved. For example, is it a 99 Cent Store type of film (budget of $500,000 to $1 million), with unknown directors, actors, etc., or is it an indie film that features major stars and/or directors who are working as a labor of love? While this last category may be low budget, the publishers are not all that sympathetic—these films can have real commercial success. Accordingly, these kinds of films often pay higher fees (sometimes as much as the major film fees discussed above), at least for important music. Some indie films are made by producers who barely scraped the money together, and they don’t even have a distributor (meaning a company to put the film in theaters and/or online, and also pay for advertising and marketing). In these cases, the producers run around to film festivals with the movie tucked under their arm, trying to find someone to adopt their baby. For these situations, a typical sync deal is a cheap license that only allows them to show the film in festivals. It’s usually limited to a term of one year, with fees in the range of $500 to $2,500. If the producers get a distributor, they come back and negotiate a full set of rights. The full rights use fees are specifically negotiated depending on all the factors we discussed, so I can’t give you much guidance, except to say they’re substantially less than the fees quoted above for major films. Sometimes there’s an initial lower fee plus an additional fee (a) for hitting box-office numbers (not as relevant these days), (b) when it goes on traditional TV (also less relevant), or (c) when it’s streamed. Or the publisher might ask for a percentage of the film’s net revenue. Or, with a major song, the publisher might not quote anything beyond festivals but rather say they’ll discuss it when there’s a deal to put out the film. Sometimes, at the time the festival license deal is made, the publisher will quote a price for the rights beyond the film festivals (imaginatively called a quote ). This is good for the filmmaker, because they know what it will cost to go forward. But the publisher will limit how long the quote is valid (for example, it’s only good for for ninety days to six months, after which it expires and the film folks have to negotiate from scratch). 3. Documentaries. Documentaries (which are called “docs” by their friends) historically made little money, so they got cheap fees. But with the advent of Netflix, HBO, Disney+, and other players hungry for documentary content, the budgets have risen, and so has the price of songs. If a doc is independently made and going to festivals to shop for a distribution deal, the fees are about the same as those for indie films that we discussed in 2 above. If the doc already has a home (like Netflix or Amazon), the budget could be substantial, but filmmakers plead for mercy because the music license fees come out of their pocket, not the studio’s. That’s because their deal for the doc will be for a set dollar amount that includes all costs of making the film, and a chunk of those costs are music. So every dollar that goes to music comes from whatever profit the filmmakers would make on top of their costs. And the streamers want all rights cleared, so these licenses are more expensive. A general range is $2,000 to $7,500 per song, but it could be more for a major song that’s used prominently. To the extent publishers think the doc will help promote a song, or if a songwriter really wants their song included in the project, things get flexible. And if a documentary is music-centric (such as the life of a major star), the publishers definitely see this as promotional for their songs and will do cheaper licenses. 4. Television. Except for the competition and talk shows, which we’ll discuss in a minute, most TV licenses are now in perpetuity and include the right to use the program in all media now or hereafter known. But here’s some things you should try to carve out: You shouldn’t give out-of-context trailers (see page 254 for what that is), though you’ll have to give in-context trailers. Except for in-context trailers, don’t let them use clips of your song apart from the show. (This is tougher to get with competition shows.) Exclude theatrical releases, as some TV shows get released in theaters, particularly outside the United States. So if you exclude the rights, you can make a deal at the time. However, some streaming shows will push hard for the option to do a theatrical release outside the U.S. If you give them these rights, you should get more money. How much can you get television usage? Around $10,000 to $50,000 plus, depending on whether they’re licensing an obscure song or a well-known hit, and also how prominently it’s used. If you’re an indie artist looking for exposure—some artists have launched their careers by having music on a big TV show—you might give them a very cheap rate, meaning $1,000 or so. Sometimes it’s even less, since they know they “gotcha.” On the other hand, if you’re a superstar who couldn’t care less, you’ll carve out their livers. Unless you’re a really major player, you won’t get any more money for in-context ads; that’s always included in the price. If they want out-of-context ads, however, you can get paid for the specific promotional uses. It’s a weekly fee, based on a menu of prices, depending on where the song is used. For example, there’s one price for using your song on the network and its affiliates only, another price for basic cable, another for wireless mobile, and so forth. Impossible again to give you much guidance, as it depends on the song and the usage, but it’s generally a few thousand dollars per week for each category (network, mobile, etc.). Sometimes you can limit how long they run the promo. The competition shows (like American Idol, X Factor, The Voice, Dancing with the Stars, Shark Tank Karaoke —okay I made up the last one…) and talk shows (Fallon, Colbert, etc.), pay according to a menu that’s set in concrete. In other words, they tell you what they’re willing to pay for the rights they want, plus they get options for further rights at set prices. All these deals are done on a most favored nations (MFN) basis, meaning they pay the same fee for every song on the show, no matter what. So there’s no negotiating the fees—these shows use such a huge amount of music that they don’t have time to negotiate every contract separately. Either you take what they offer, or you don’t put your song in the show. The exact license fees vary from show to show, but if all rights were exercised, they’d be in the range set out above for non-competition shows. However, they start with a small fee (which also varies among the shows, but it’s several thousand dollars) that allows them to use the song for two to five years, in the United States and Canada only. For that initial fee, they get things like unlimited broadcasts (within the two- to five-year term), recaps (a program that features clips from earlier shows in the season), streaming, and in-context usage for advertising and promotion. Some shows are even sophisticated enough to license the lyrics, in case the camera pans past a contestant who’s reading the lyrics while singing. If they want to go beyond those rights, they’ll pay additional amounts for things like territories outside the United States and Canada, downloads of the program, and extending their rights to perpetuity. They also have to pay if they repurpose the original use, meaning use it apart from the show. For example, they take a clip from a TV show and exploit it alone online. Payment for this can be a flat fee, or sometimes a rolling fee based on the view count of a video (for example, $X for every 500,000 views). Sometimes there’s a revenue share of the gross earnings, meaning advertising money around the video, which can run anywhere from 15% to 50%. 5. Streaming services (Netflix, Amazon, Hulu, etc.). The deals for these services are in line with the motion picture and television deals we just discussed. However, the PRO performance money you get for streaming is much smaller than what you’d get for performances on television or in foreign theaters, because the streamers pay far less than the television networks and foreign theaters (if you don’t recall, see page 229 for what performance monies are). So try to get a higher licensing fee to make up for this. 6. Commercials. For commercials, a reasonably well-known song can get anywhere from $50,000 to well into six figures for a one-year national usage in the United States, on television, radio, and Internet. Really well-known songs in major campaigns can go higher, sometimes over a million for a classic, iconic song. These figures get scaled down for regional or local usages, and for periods of less than a year. Internet-only usage is on the rise, and the prices are rapidly going up for the simple reason that these ads reach a lot of people—particularly the younger folks that advertisers want, who rarely watch television these days. The issue of “territory” on the Internet is interesting, as the Net is of course available worldwide. Your license should require the advertiser to geo-filter , which means the commercial can only be available to users in the territories you gave them. That works reasonably well, though I’m told it’s not that hard to get around it. A new twist that really scrambles your brain is the “repurposing of commercials for commercial use.” Huh? Well, for example, you take an incredible Super Bowl commercial, put it on a YouTube channel and run ads around it (ads that run prior to playing the video, which are called pre-rolls , plus the usual banner ads, pop-ups, etc.). So they’re actually making money running commercials, by running other commercials. I know, weird… Well, the publishers quickly figured out that sometimes the advertiser earned more than the cost of the commercial using this little trick. So now they either exclude repurposing from the deal, or they charge an additional amount for it. That’s usually an additional flat fee, but it can be a share of the advertising revenue (15% to 50%, depending on the usage and the stature of the song). 7. Video Games. Here we’re talking about real video games (like Call of Duty, Grand Theft Auto ) and not apps. Apps are on deck, coming up next. As we discussed in the context of recordings (on page 156 ), video game makers don’t think any particular song adds that much value, so the deals are almost all flat fees and not royalties. The fee for a video game license can be as low as “nothing,” for example, if you want to hammer the song into the heads of gamers while they chase down zombies. Most licenses are in the $5,000 or $10,000 range for lesser-known songs and artists, and around $15,000 to $20,000 for big hits. These licenses are usually for perpetuity, unless it’s an annual sports-type game (such as FIFA, NHL , or Madden NFL , which has a new edition each year), in which case the licenses are three to ten years. The only exception to flat-fee video game licenses is for music-based games, such as Just Dance, Guitar Hero (it’ll be back…), SingStar , and karaoke games. These licenses allow the manufacturers to sell games with music embedded in them, and also to sell downloads of songs (or packs of songs) that can be added to the game. Because music is essential to these products, the gaming companies are willing to pay a royalty for every game sold. The specifics of these licenses are confidential, so I’m not free to publish them, but the deals are structured as advances against either (a) a penny-rate royalty for each game unit sold and each download, or (b) a percentage royalty, which is set aside for all the music rights, then pro-rated among all the music involved in the sale or download. If the game company wants to use the song in a commercial for the video game, you can sometimes get an additional $30,000 to several hundred thousand dollars, depending on the importance of the song and how it’s used. 8. Apps. By apps in this section, I mean apps that use music, as opposed to apps that simply let you access a music streaming service like Spotify, Apple Music, or iHeartRadio—these latter ones are covered in the streaming section. The app deals are either a flat fee (the amount varies hugely, depending on how the music is used) or a share of revenue. More and more, publishers are insisting on some kind of sharing. As a general rule, the recordings and songs combined get about 50% of the revenue. The publishers want half of that, though they sometimes end up with more like 10% to 20% of the total revenue (meaning 10% to 20% of 100% of the money, which is 20% to 40% of the recording/publishing 50% of the money). Some apps don’t use the recordings; they have someone else play the song, and in that case publishers can get up to 50% of the revenue, depending on how important music is to the project. However, the norm is closer to 30%. As we discussed when we talked about recordings, the platform selling the app (e.g., the iTunes or Android store) takes 30% off the top, so these percentages are applied to the money that’s left over, which is 100% of what the app developer gets. App deals are all short-term (one year to eighteen months), so the label and publisher can renegotiate if the app is a success. There are companies that make deals with the labels and publishers, then license the tracks to developers. The idea is to make the process simpler for everyone, especially app developers who have little patience for these kinds of things. Examples are Songlily, FyrFly, Rumblefish, Lickd, and others, and some of these companies license more than just games. In the biz, these are called micro-licensing services , because they deal in small (micro) transactions. 9. Bundled Services. As we discussed on page 160 , a bundled service is one that puts together two or more products or services (Two for the Price of One!). There are two flavors of bundles: music bundles and mixed service bundles . What the hell are those? A music bundle is the sale of two or more music-only products together, such as a download code when you buy a CD; these are obviously disappearing. For music bundles, you get your rate for each piece of product as if it were sold separately, but they’ll want a discount since they’re getting a price that’s less than what they’d get if they had sold them separately. A mixed service bundle is the sale of a music product (like a streaming service) along with a non-music service. For example, you get a music streaming subscription when you buy Amazon Prime. Or you might get music when you buy a device, like a phone, a voice-activated speaker, a virtual reality (VR) headset, a singing toilet, etc. For a mixed service bundle, you get the same percentages you get for streaming, computed exactly the same way as the streaming royalties on page 240 . The difference is that the percentages are applied to the money left after deducting the price of the non-music element. For example, if you get a streaming subscription when you buy a phone, you’d deduct the price of a phone. But to keep that from being zero, there’s a per-subscriber minimum, which for subscription bundles is currently 25¢. (Flip back to page 240 if this is making your eyes spin.) 10. NFTs, Metaverse, and the like. Sorry, not much data yet. In the few music NFT deals I’ve seen, it’s a split of 50% to the artist, 25% to the label, and 25% to the publisher. But these have mostly dried up. The sync licenses for virtual concerts in the Metaverse have been for low fees, but there are so few of them that I can’t give you any norm or range yet. Interesting side note: When publishers license mainstream media these days, they try to carve out the Metaverse. The theory is that it’s better to negotiate a price if and when there’s a specific deal on the table. That works well, unless of course you’re doing a license specifically for the Metaverse, which makes it harder to carve out… 11. Podcasts. Podcast deals are small, and usually a flat fee, essentially a transcription license (the equivalent of a sync without video). Just like we discussed for recordings, a lot of podcasters simply use music and don’t bother paying anyone. But the publishers have been cracking down on this, so lately there are more deals. The range is around $2,500 to $5,000 per song, sometimes more for bigger songs and prominent uses. 12. Ringtones and Ringbacks. Although they barely exist anymore, ringtones are permanent downloads (see page 149 for what those are), and as we discussed on page 221 , the compulsory mechanical royalty for ringtones is 24¢. Ringbacks (also on the endangered species list) aren’t downloads because they live on the server of the mobile provider and are played just to the caller. So they’re considered a stream and paid at those rates (see page 240 ). SAMPLES Congrats! You now know enough for me to tell you about samples. I couldn’t have put this section earlier, because you first needed to understand both records and publishing. Now that you do, let’s boogie. Sampling is the art of taking any sound (whether it’s a full recording, or just a drum sound, synthesizer riff, voice, etc.) and making a digital copy, which you then incorporate into your own masterpiece. Unless you’ve been living in a moon colony, you know that every rapper on the planet samples massively from other people’s works. When the technology first developed, everyone thought it was so cool that they basically stole other people’s music without bothering to ask. Turns out folks didn’t particularly appreciate that, and after a slew of lawsuits in the 1990s that slammed record labels, everyone now handles sample licensing with white velvet gloves. Indeed, companies won’t release a record containing samples without assurances that the samples have been cleared (meaning properly licensed), and you as an artist want the same thing. It’s you that’s left holding the bag if there’s a lawsuit. Clearing samples is a major pain in the butt. You have to get a license from both the owner of the recording and the owner of the sampled song. But there’s nothing in the law that requires anyone to let you use a sample of their work, so a record company or publisher who’s been sampled can make you pull it off your record. Or pay the equivalent of a ransom for the ruler of a small kingdom. And it gets worse. You can’t clear a sample until you finish the track—the publisher and record company want to hear exactly how the sample is used before they’ll tell you how much they want to charge, or whether they’ll let you use it at any price. That puts you in the position of spending money to make a record before you know whether you can use the sample in it. If you’re on a tight schedule and/or if it ruins your song to take out the sample, you’re toast. Sound like fun? Suppose you don’t actually sample, but just duplicate the track by playing it in the studio. Does that solve your problems? Well, only half. You’ve just created what we call a replay . Replays eliminate the need to license the recording, but you still need to license the song (unless you qualify for a fair use , which we’ll discuss on page 336 ). As you’ll see, there’s no bright-line test of whether something’s a fair use, so you can’t be sure that you’re okay. And it will be expensive to prove you’re right if the other guy comes after you. So as a practical matter, your label won’t put out your record and risk a lawsuit if you include an uncleared sample. You’ll have to either get a license or ditch the track. If the record company gives you a license, it will want a royalty, generally in the range of 2% to 8%. I know that’s a big range, but the amount depends on the specific situation: How extensively is the recording used? How prominently? Did you sample an important song, or an obscure recording? How desperate do they think you are? Publishers always insist on owning a piece of the copyright and getting the same share of income. Again, the percentage varies with how significantly the sample is used in your record. If you’ve lifted an entire melody line, or their track is the bed of your song, they might take 50% or more; for less significant uses, the range is 10% to 30%. Both the record company and the publisher will often ask for an advance against their share, and the publishers sometimes want nonrecoupable money. A particularly fun thing happens with multiple samples. I’ve seen several situations like this: Your song has three samples. Publisher X wants 40%, Publisher Y wants 40%, and Publisher Z wants 30%. If you do some quick math, you’ll see that’s 110%. So every time you sell a record, you get to write a check out of your own pocket. Nice, eh? By the way, don’t assume the publishers will be the least bit sympathetic. Their attitude is usually something like “Those other publishers are pigs. But my share is really worth 40%, so go squeeze the other guy.” Even when you get past all these hurdles, the publishers (and some record companies) usually limit the usage of their sample to just your audio records and single-song videos. Also, the publishers will co-administer their portion of the composition (see page 312 for what co-administration is). This means they can stop you from granting a particular license—for example, you couldn’t license the song in a film or a commercial without going back to the sample’s record company and publisher and getting their consent. So when you sample, you can easily lose control of your song. The lesson in all this is that putting a sample in your record is serious business. So think about it carefully. A moment of pleasure can mean a lifetime of pain. If you’re on the Fast Track , go to the Bonus Section on page 286 . Everyone else, onward… FOREIGN SUBPUBLISHING Except for the worldwide conglomerates, publishers don’t have branch offices in all territories. So how do they collect their money when you have fans in Abu Dhabi? Well, they do it by making deals with local publishers in each territory to collect on their behalf. The local publisher is called a subpublisher . Foreign Mechanicals Before we talk about deals with the local publishers, you should know about an unusual creature that lives in most territories outside the United States. This is the mandatory mechanical rights collection society. It works like this: Most countries have a mechanical rights collection organization (mostly government mandated) that licenses all musical compositions (regardless of who owns them) used by any record company in that territory. It’s similar to the Harry Fox Agency (see page 237 ), except that it’s mandatory. It does exactly what the MLC does for streaming (see page 249 ). As noted on page 222 , mechanical licenses are not issued on a per-song basis outside the United States and Canada. Rather, the entire record is licensed for a percentage of the revenue, regardless of the number of compositions. This greatly simplifies the process of putting all the monies through one place. So the local society collects mechanical royalties from the record companies, holds them for as long as they can get away with it (they can earn interest on these monies and keep the interest for themselves), and finally sends the monies to the appropriate publishers. Just like ASCAP and BMI, they deduct their operating expenses before they distribute income, but they also deduct some things we don’t have here, like cultural and social deductions and non-music-related investments. And these other deductions can be significant, meaning 10% to 20% or more. Frankly, the societies are a bit on the murky side about all this, and their practices have stirred up concern in the last number of years. The mood of reform is in the air, so we’ll see how it plays out. At any rate, the societies now have all this money left after expenses. How do they know who to pay? Under this system, just like MLC, each local publisher files a claim with the organization, saying it owns a particular song. It can either be a claim for the entire song, or a percentage share if the rights are split among several publishers in that territory. If a claim is contested (and in some territories even if it isn’t), the publisher is required to file proof of its claim, such as a copy of the contract with the U.S. publisher. Foreign Performances As we discussed on page 230 , all foreign territories have some sort of performing rights society, usually only one per country, and usually government mandated. These societies pay the publisher’s share of performance monies to local subpublishers. They pay the writer’s share to the writer’s PRO (which in turn pays the writer), again keeping these monies out of the publishers’ hands (as we discussed on page 231 ). If there’s no foreign subpublisher, the publisher’s share will ultimately wind its way back to the U.S. publisher through the American PRO. However, it takes substantially longer, and it’s worth paying the subpublisher a piece so you can get it earlier. Also, the subpublisher has “boots on the ground” in each territory, so they can make sure the songs are properly registered, and also use their relationships to solve any local problems. How much do subpublishers get paid for all this? Well… Subpublisher Charges Subpublishers typically retain anywhere from 10% to 50% of the monies earned, with the vast majority of deals being from 15% to 25%. The contracts are actually written the opposite way, stating that the subpublisher collects all monies and remits 75% to 85% of it to the U.S. publisher. The shorthand industry expression of these deals is “75/25” or “85/15,” referring to the percentages kept by each party. (Oh, and you don’t pronounce the “slash.” You just say, “Seventy five, twenty five.”) By the way, I heard of one deal where the local subpublisher kept no percentage whatsoever of the earnings (i.e., they remitted 100%). Can you figure out why anyone would do this? See page 284 for the answer. (You haven’t learned about part of the answer yet.) Covers It’s customary for the local publisher to get an increased percentage for cover records . As we discussed, a cover record, also called a cover , is a recording by an artist other than the original artist, and in this case, it means a recording of a U.S. composition by a local artist. The subpublisher usually gets 40% to 50% of the earnings from cover recordings (meaning it remits 50% to 60%). In other words, they keep more money on covers as an incentive for them to beat the bushes. When you make a subpublishing deal, be sure to limit the subpublisher’s increased percentage to the earnings from the cover recording only. If you don’t, you’ll decrease your money on the U.S. version when the local publisher’s nephew records the song. By the way, you should try to make sure that all covers have a different title. Since it’s usually in the local language, that’s not an issue. But sometimes it’s in the original language, particularly in an English-speaking territory. If the cover has the same title as the original, it can get difficult to sort through which version earned what in the way of mechanicals and performances. Over the last few years, things have gotten better in this area because of metadata (as discussed on page 72 , metadata is the information electronically embedded in each song file, and it identifies the song and writer along with a bunch of label junk, so everyone can easily tell a cover from the original). Nonetheless, it’s still better to have different title. Performance Monies A number of subpublishers want a bigger percentage of performance royalties than they do for other monies. For example, they may keep 25% of all monies except performances, but keep 50% of performances. Why? Here’s their argument: Assuming the subpublisher gets 25% of all earnings other than performances, for every dollar of earnings it gets 25¢. The 75¢ paid back to the U.S. publisher includes both the publisher’s share and the writer’s share (as did of course the dollar paid to them in the first place), and thus their percentage applied to the total writer/publisher combination. All cool. On performances, however, remember that the writer’s share is paid to the U.S. performing rights society, and not to the local subpublisher (see page 265 ). This means that, instead of collecting the full $1 of performance monies, the subpublisher only gets 50¢ (the publisher’s share). Here’s a chart: Mechanicals Performances Total Writer/Publisher Earnings $1.00 $1.00 Amount Paid to Subpublisher $1.00 $ .50 (the other $.50 is paid to the writer directly by society) Subpublisher’s 25% Share $ .25 $ .125 Percentage of Dollar Earned 25% 12.5% Accordingly, subpublishers argue, they’re really only getting 12.5% of the performance dollar. Thus they should have 50% of performance monies, so they can get 25% of the full performance dollar and be in the same position as they are with other monies. This 50% equals 25¢ (50% of the 50¢ publisher’s share of performance monies), or 25% of the total writer/publisher performance dollar, meaning the publisher and writer each get 50¢. This reasoning, while clever and not without merit, usually gives way to sheer bargaining power. If the subpublisher has enough bargaining power, they’ll pull it off. Otherwise, the U.S. publisher simply says no, or compromises somewhere in between. Advances It’s customary for subpublishers to pay the U.S. publisher an advance against their earnings. This is basically a banking transaction—if the U.S. publisher’s catalog has a track record, the subpublisher pays an advance based on historical earnings. It will vary, of course, with the size of the territory and the size of the catalog. The range of advances is anywhere from zero (for a new artist or a so-so older catalog) to millions of dollars for major catalogs in major territories. Again, as with all other rules, there are exceptions. For example, if the publisher controls a new artist whose record is doing extremely well in the United States and the local subpublisher is excited and thinks it will work in their territory, the advance can get driven up, despite the lack of historical earnings. Advances are also affected by the currency exchange rates. When the dollar is weak, high U.S. dollar advances are relatively easy to come by. And of course the opposite is true when the dollar gets stronger. In other words, the same number of English pounds equals more or fewer dollars at any given time, depending on the current exchange rate. When it equals more, you can get a larger dollar advance. A deal with no advance is known as a collection deal , meaning the subpublisher merely collects on behalf of the U.S. publisher. Also, if there is no advance, the percentage kept by the subpublisher is lower, usually in the 10% to 15% range. “At Source” If your subpublishing deal isn’t directly with the publisher in a particular territory (for example, you make a deal with a major U.S. publisher for all of Europe), one of the most important points to have in your subpublishing agreement is a requirement that all monies be computed “ at source .” We touched on this in the context of streaming, on page 95 , but since the fun and games were invented by old-time publishing rip-off wizards, let’s take a closer look. Assume you have a deal with a U.S. publisher for Europe. If your deal is “at source,” it means the percentage you get must be based on the earnings in the country where they are earned , which is the source . For example, if you have an 85/15 deal at source in Germany, and $1 is earned there, you get 85¢. If you don’t say “at source,” you’ll pay 15% to the local subpublisher in Germany, then another percentage to your U.S. publisher when the money comes back to the United States. An extreme example of why your deal should be “at source” is this scam, which has been around long enough to have a beard like Dumbledore: A subpublisher in the United Kingdom makes a 75/25 deal with a U.S. publisher for all the territories of Europe. The subpublisher in Germany (owned by the UK publisher) collects a dollar, keeps 50¢ as its collection fee, then pays 50¢ to the UK publisher. The 50¢ received in the United Kingdom is then split between the U.S. publisher and the UK publisher. Here’s a play by play: Earnings in Germany $1.00 Less: German Company’s 50% Share – .50 Amount Remitted to UK $ .50 Less: UK Company’s 25% Share – .125 AMOUNT REMITTED TO U.S. PUBLISHER $.375 It doesn’t take a genius to see that the $1 earned at source (in this case, Germany, where the actual earnings were generated) gets dwindled radically before it finds its way into your pocket. And your 75% deal is in reality only 37.5% (you only got 37.5¢ out of the $1 earned in Germany). This hustle is no longer played in the shadows, but right up front. If you don’t say the deal is “at source,” the contract will say that the publisher can deduct both the foreign subpublisher’s share and its own share before paying you. If your publisher doesn’t own the foreign affiliate, the local publisher’s share doesn’t go into their pocket, so you don’t have the same argument. But you can argue that the U.S. publisher’s share has to include the foreign publisher’s fee. In other words, if the U.S. publisher gets 25%, it could pay 15% to a local publisher and keep the other 10%, so in effect you’re getting 75% “at source.” If you can’t do that, then in the worst case you should limit what the subpublishers can charge. For example, put in your contract that they can’t deduct more than, say, 10% to 20% before sending the dough back to the United States. The result of this push-pull depends on bargaining power. When you look through the smoke and mirrors, this is only a matter of dollars: How much do you get, and how much does the publisher keep? But make sure you address this issue directly. Either the deal is “at source” or it’s not; say so from the get-go. Translation/Adaptation Shares An interesting quirk of subpublishing deals is the translator or adaptor share. If your song is popular, many territories will want to release a version with lyrics in the language of that territory. This all sounds innocent enough, but there are some surprises: 1. First of all, under local society rules, the local lyricist automatically gets a share of royalties. Most societies require that the lyricist get about one-sixth of gross (meaning combined writer and publisher shares) for mechanicals, and one-sixth of the writer’s share only for performance royalties. The societies pay this share directly to the lyricist, so you don’t really have anything to say about it. 2. Subpublishers, naturally, want to take this share completely from your royalties. If you have sufficient bargaining power, you may be able to muscle them into absorbing it out of their percentage. Remember, they often get an increased percentage of cover recordings, like 60%. As their percentage decreases, however, so does the likelihood of your making them eat it. So, more commonly, the translator’s percentage comes off the top, which means you pay your share of it and the subpublisher pays theirs. In other words, if a dollar comes in and the translator gets 16%, you split 84¢ with the subpublisher. That means, if your deal pays you 60% of the earnings from covers, you’re absorbing 60% of the translator’s share, and the subpublisher eats the other 40%. 3. Always require that the translation be registered separately with the society (since it will have a foreign title, this isn’t so difficult), and also require the publisher to make sure the translator doesn’t get paid on the English-language version. This can be done in most territories, but some (notably Germany) insist on paying the translator on the original composition no matter what you do (in the case of Germany, however, the translator gets only a piece of mechanicals and not other income). The upshot is that you should have the absolute right to approve whether the subpublisher can authorize a local translation. Apart from the fact that a translation takes money out of your pocket, you want to be sure you like what they’re doing. Make them send you an English translation of the lyrics for approval before they can record. If you don’t, your ballad may find itself associated with a number of shady topics, drugs, politics, etc. The Black Box Remember, as we discussed on page 264 , that the societies collect mechanicals for all songs, not just those registered. But they only pay out for the songs that are registered. If you recall our discussion of this issue with the MLC, you’ve probably figured out that there may be some songs not claimed by any local publisher. And you’re right—there are always unclaimed songs. For example, through sheer inadvertence, a U.S. publisher may not have a subpublishing deal in a particular territory. Or maybe the rights are disputed in the United States, so there are no deals with a foreign publisher. These unclaimed monies are called black-box monies. In some countries (notably Germany, Italy, Spain, France, and Holland), if the funds aren’t claimed after a set period of time (usually three years), they’re paid to the local publishers. Each publisher gets a portion of them, based on the ratio that its earnings bear to the total earnings of the society, and also based on seniority. So if a publisher earned 100,000 drapkes and the society collected 1,000,000 drapkes, it might receive 100,000/1,000,000, or 10%, of the black-box monies, and perhaps another 3% because it’s been around for twenty years. This can be a substantial source of additional revenue, and the local publisher keeps it all because the monies aren’t earned by any particular compositions. When you get into the “major leagues,” you may be able to get a portion of the black-box money. The usual formula is to take a proportionate amount of the black box, based on the ratio that your songs’ earnings bear to the total earnings of that subpublisher. For example, if your songs earned a total of $200,000 for the subpublisher, and its total earnings were $1 million, you would get 20% of the black-box monies, because your $200,000 is 20% of its $1 million total. The publisher would deduct its percentage from that and pay you the balance. In recent years, the societies have begun allowing electronic registration, which enormously simplifies the process, and makes it easier to register compositions around the world. Because of this, most songs are now properly registered, and the amount of money in the black box is dropping. But it’s still around. PRINTED MUSIC Printed music historically meant paper (remember that?), but today it means much more. The traditional print market was sheet music (printed music of a single song—the kind you stuff inside your piano bench) and folios (which are collections of songs, such as Greatest Hits of the Nineties, The Complete Led Zeppelin, The David Hasselhoff Songbook , etc.). Collections of songs by a number of different artists are called mixed folios . Another type is a matching folio , which has all the songs of a particular album (i.e., it “matches” the album). Matching folios are usually printed with the album artwork on the cover and various posed candid shots of the artist inside. Royalties The following royalties are what’s paid to a publisher for physical (meaning printed on paper) print rights. We’ll hit digital print in the next section. For single-song physical sheet music, the standard royalty is 20% of the marked retail price (currently most single-song sheet music has a $4.95 retail price, so the publisher gets about 99¢). Royalties on folios are 10% to 12.5% of the marked retail price, and the current marked selling price of most folios is $24.95. A personality folio is one that has the picture of the performing artist plastered all over it, such as Stevie Wonder’s Greatest Hits . (A matching folio [see the previous section for what that is] is also a personality folio, but limited to one album.) For a personality folio, there’s an additional royalty of 5% of the marked retail selling price for use of the name and likeness of the artist, and it goes to the artist (who may or may not be the same person as the songwriter). If the songwriter is also the artist, the publisher may be entitled to the extra 5% if their deal with the writer includes name and likeness rights. Try to keep it for yourself in your deal. Unless the folio represents the selected works of a particular songwriter and only one publisher, it’ll have songs written and/or published by a number of different people. Thus, the royalties are pro-rated . For example, if there are twenty compositions in the folio, and you own ten, you would get 10/20 (one-half) of the 10% to 12.5% royalty. When you negotiate a pro-ration provision, be sure to insist that the royalty can only be pro-rated on the basis of copyrighted, royalty-bearing works in the folio. Otherwise your royalty gets reduced by “Mary Had a Little Lamb” and “The Star-Spangled Banner,” even though the printer isn’t paying anyone for these songs. The balance of print music consists of things like instructional music (such as putting your songs in How to Play the Nose Flute ), marching band arrangements, choir arrangements, dance arrangements, etc. The royalty for these is generally 10% of retail unless it’s a folio of lyrics only, in which case the royalty is 5% to 7.5%. Print rights also include reprints of lyrics in books, magazines, greeting cards, etc. For books, if it’s just a snippet of the lyrics, the rate is around 1¢ per unit, with a $200 minimum. For more extensive reprints, or a use that’s significant to the story, the per-unit rate can climb to about 4¢, with an advance based on anticipated sales—for major book authors, the advance can go over $100,000. The fee to use lyrics in films varies with the kind of use. If they’re used as the title of the film, it could be in the range of $5,000 to $10,000, sometimes much more for a major song. If the script is based on the lyrics of the song, there can be a really substantial fee and even a profit participation in the film. If the film includes the song as well as the lyrics, the sync license will include the film company’s right to use the lyrics in closed captioning and subtitles in other languages. For paper greeting cards (we’ll discuss digital e-cards in a minute), the publishers get the greater of a penny rate (usually 12.5¢ to 15¢) or a percentage of the wholesale price (usually 5% to 8%). If it’s a greeting card that actually plays the song, publishers also insist that their royalty can’t be less than what’s paid for the recording. Reprints of lyrics on clothing run from 8% to 11% of wholesale, depending on whether the goods are sold in high-end stores or through a mass merchandiser (meaning a store like Walmart or other places that sell at deeply discounted prices in a no-frills environment). The mass merchandiser’s sales are at the lower royalties, around 6% to 8% of wholesale, because the discounted prices mean there’s a thinner profit margin. Advertising uses (such as printing lyrics in magazines, newspapers, and on billboards) are flat fees, and can run $25,000 or more for major uses. Traditional lyric reprints on inserts in physical albums are customarily free. However, as physical disappears, lyric videos are today’s equivalent of lyric reprints. As we’ll discuss on page 283 , publishers try to get more money for these. Digital Print Rights The most direct transition of traditional print to digital media are sites like Musicnotes.com and SheetMusicPlus.com , which sell downloadable sheet music. That is truly the equivalent of (and a substitute for) paper sheet music. Also, sites like Tonara and Chromatik have apps for tablets and smartphones that have cool things like ticking metronomes and pages that turn in sync. The cost of these products is about the same as physical print music, which is currently $4.95 per song. To license these rights, publishers get 50% of the income—a big jump from the 20% they get on physical print. A much broader use in the digital world is posting lyrics online without the music. These are places like Genius, LyricFind, and Musixmatch. The lyrics are usually available free to users, because the sites have advertising up the yin-yang, though some sites have subscribers. Interestingly, the largest purveyor of lyrics is Google, who licenses the right to display lyrics in their searches. Turns out lyrics are one of the most searched topics… apparently well ahead of “snail collectors.” For allowing sites to reprint the lyrics, publishers get about 50% of the advertising revenue, often with a minimum amount per view, and (if it’s subscription based) a minimum amount per subscriber (the PSM concept we discussed on page 144 ). However, I’m told Google pays a flat fee per year for lyric search rights. A number of lyric sites aren’t licensed at all, though the publishers have recently been more aggressive about shutting them down. There are also lyric videos, which we’ll discuss on page 283 . E-cards are those cutesy-wutesy pictures of snow falling on sleighs while music plays in the background, and they’re another form of digital print. For these, the publisher gets 5% to 8% of the retail price, with a minimum of 10¢ to 15¢ per unit. Music instruction and notation apps (such as one that scrolls along as you play the song), are also digital print rights. The deals range from 15% to 25%, depending on how interactive the app is, and whether it’s really educational or just entertainment. If the recording isn’t used, the norm is more like 50%. That’s because the publishers know the app would have to pay 60% for both the recording and the lyrics if they did use the recording, so they give a discount to 50% if they don’t. That incentivizes the app developers to not use the recording, and of course makes the publisher more money. Unlike physical print deals, digital deals are non-exclusive , meaning the publisher can license the same rights to multiple users. This is a big shift in the industry. Historically, setting up a printing company, buying the presses, hiring a sales and warehouse force, and taking the inventory risk (which of course doesn’t exist with digital) was so expensive that the printers wouldn’t put out a particular song catalog unless they had it exclusively. The publishers were fine with this for two reasons: (1) they didn’t want to invest in setting up a print company, and (2) by making long-term exclusive deals, the publishers could get a good-size advance from the print company. Obviously as the physical print world shrivels, so does the potential revenue and therefore the amount of advance they can get. Term Licenses for print music are for limited periods of time, usually three to five years. The exceptions are licenses of lyrics for books, movies, and things like that, where they run for the life of copyright. As we just discussed, these licenses are nonexclusive, except for physical goods. Physical printed goods have some other peculiarities, namely what happens to the stuff at the end of the term? Certainly they can’t manufacture any more inventory, but can they sell what they have? Normally these licenses give the printer a right to sell their existing physical inventory for a period of six to twelve months after the term expires. These sell-off rights are non-exclusive (meaning someone else can sell the same materials at the same time). At the end of the six to twelve months, they have to trash anything left over, or donate it to charity. For mixed folios (because they’re so much more expensive, and also because there are a lot of other writers involved), the printers try not to have any time limit on their sell-off rights, and in fact want the right to keep manufacturing them. When you make these deals, make sure there’s no stockpiling, dumping , or distress sales . Stockpiling is where the printer manufactures eight quadrillion units right before the end of the term, so that they have tons of your inventory to sell after the term. (Your new printer won’t like it if the market is already flooded with the same books it’s trying to sell.) You stop this by saying the printer can only manufacture enough to meet their reasonably anticipated needs during the term. Dumping and distress sales mean the printer sells your inventory at less than customary wholesale prices. Way less. You don’t want this because, if they end up with a ton of goods left over, they’ll blow them out at whatever rock-bottom price they can get. (Since they have to destroy or donate everything they don’t sell, they use the age-old theory that it’s better to get something than nothing.) This practice, shall we say, “perturbs” your new printer, who is trying to sell the same stuff at full price. You solve this by saying your materials can be sold only through normal retail channels, at normal wholesale prices. CONTROLLED COMPOSITION CLAUSES Congratulations! Two times! Congratulations Number One: You now know enough to talk about controlled composition clauses in record deals. Just like samples, you need to understand both record deals and publishing to get these concepts. Congratulations Number Two: Most of the provisions in these clauses are becoming less and less relevant. So you don’t need to waste nearly the amount of time I did to learn this crap. The controlled composition clause (also known to its buddies as a controlled comp clause , although it has no “buddies” except record companies) puts a limit on how much the company has to pay for each song (as opposed to the recordings). This clause used to be one of the most significant provisions in your record deal. That was because it reduced your mechanical royalties, and if you’re a songwriter, mechanicals are paid even when your record deal is unrecouped (unlike your record royalties, as you know). But it’s not nearly as important today for several reasons: 1. The Copyright Act says that digital downloads created under record deals made after June 22, 1995, can’t be subject to a controlled comp clause. So downloads are paid at a full rate, no matter what. 2. While these clauses still apply to physical goods, those have obviously taken a massive nosedive. So reducing the rate on physical isn’t nearly as significant as it once was. 3. But the real reason these clauses have faded is because streaming mechanicals are paid by the DSPs ( not your record company), so the record companies no longer care how much you get. Still, there’s a controlled comp clause in every record deal. The good news is that companies don’t fight a lot about the mechanical rate limits in these provisions because they’re really just about physical goods. So if you don’t win any other points in your deal, you should be able to score here. Nonetheless, let’s look at these clauses because (a) there’s more to them than the cap on mechanical rates, and (b) I had to learn this junk, so why shouldn’t you at least get a taste of it? (I’m not really feeling the sympathy here…) Okay, enough snark. At least for now. A threshold question in this area is the definition of which songs are covered by your controlled comp clause. The songs subject to the clause are called controlled compositions , and are defined as songs that are written, owned, or controlled by the artist (in whole or in part). However, it’s usually written more broadly than that, and includes: 1. Any song in which the artist has an income or other interest. This means that, even if the artist doesn’t own or control the song, if he or she wrote it or otherwise gets a piece of its earnings, it’s a controlled composition . 2. The definition often includes compositions owned or controlled by the producer of the recordings. You really have little, if any, control over a producer’s publishing, and thus you should try hard to knock this provision out. It’s hard to get rid of this, except at superstar levels, but do your best. Before we go into the detail of mechanical limits, let’s hit the parts of the controlled comp clause that go beyond records. These provisions deal with things like audiovisual works, websites, use of lyrics, advertising and promotion, and other stuff that’s still very relevant. The labels of course want all these rights for free, claiming they’re “promotional” for your records, which they are. But the line between what’s “promotional” and what’s “commercial” is getting blurred these days, and the publishers want to get paid. For example, what about lyric videos and behind-the-scenes footage (like in the studio or backstage at a concert)? Those are promotional, but they can also generate revenue when they go online and have ads around them. If you can exclude those rights from your controlled comp clause and negotiate separately, that’s awesome. Otherwise, if you have to give your record company the rights, try to get paid something for it. If you have a publisher, they can help you with this. Now to the limits. Companies limit mechanical royalties for controlled comps on physical product in two ways: 1. Rate per Song. You may remember that the statutory rate in the United States is now 12¢ per song. Up until the 1976 Copyright Act, the statutory had been 2¢ for many years. The ink was hardly dry on the 1976 Act, which raised the rate to 2.75¢, when the record companies hit on the idea that they should require artists to license controlled compositions at 75% of the statutory rate. (Controlled composition clauses existed before the 1976 Copyright Act, but they didn’t reduce the rate below statutory.) Companies still try for this 75% rate with most new artists, but it’s gotten easier to push this up to 100% as physical sales fall. Even the biggest superstars have some form of controlled composition clause, although the “limit” is 100% of the minimum statutory rate. 2. Rate per Album/EP/Single. There is also a limit of ten or eleven times the single-song rate for each album, five times for an EP, and two times for a single. These issues are more complex than they seem. So let’s take a deeper look. MAXIMUM RATE PER SONG Because the maximum album rate is a multiple of the single-song rate, let’s first look at how they treat each song. Here’s the skinny: The first argument is to make sure you get 100% of statutory, rather than their standard, off-the-shelf “75% of statutory.” As I said, this is getting considerably easier, but if you get a stickler at the label, try to get the percentage over 75%—anywhere over 75% would be nice. If you can’t, one compromise is to ask for an escalation on later albums. For example, you might have a 75% rate on album 1, 85% on album 2, and 100% on album 3. Or another possibility is an escalation based on revenue (calculated in the same way we talked about for escalating record royalties on page 109 ). Minimum Statutory Rate. The limit per composition is based on the minimum statutory rate. This means that all compositions are treated as if they are five minutes or less in duration, regardless of their actual playing time—in other words, there is no additional payment for lengthy compositions as there would be under a compulsory license. For example, the current statutory rate for a seven-minute song is 16.1¢ (see page 221 for why), but under these provisions, you’re only paid 12¢ if you get 100% of statutory, or 8¢ (75% of 12¢) if you have a 75% rate. Changes in Statutory Rate. As we discussed, the statutory rate can be changed by the Copyright Royalty Board, as happened in 2023, and thereafter it adjusts based on the CPI (see page 221 ). But controlled composition clauses set a rate that doesn’t change. Thus, even if you get a full statutory rate in your deal, it’s normally locked to the statutory rate on a particular date, and there’s no increase if the statutory rate later escalates. This is tough to change, even for superstars. The companies lock into the statutory rate in effect on one of these three dates: (a) the date of recording, (b) the date the recording is delivered to the company, or (c) the date of first release of the recording. The general thinking (and historically this has been correct) is that the latest possible date is best for you—the statutory rate has never gone down, and thus the longer you wait, the more likely it may go up. Free Goods, Real and Imagined. The controlled composition clause will say that you get no mechanicals on free goods (see page 84 for what free goods are). Nothing wrong with that; the company isn’t getting paid for them, so they don’t pay mechanicals. Some companies also frame this as a discount of the PPD, rather than free goods. In other words, if they take 10% of the PPD to incentivize dealers to buy them, then 10% of the sales would be deemed “free” and not bear mechanicals. (There are also reduced mechanicals for the deeper discounts of mid-price and budget, which we’ll discuss separately.) Multiple Uses. Controlled composition clauses say that if a particular song is used more than once on the same record, you only get paid as if it were used once. Short Uses. The companies don’t want to pay for uses under ninety seconds, such as intros (a little snippet before another song), interludes (a short piece between songs), or outros (which means either [a] a little snippet after a song, or [b] a belly-button that’s not an “innie”). Reduced Rates. The company typically asks for a 75% discount on the agreed rate for anything other than sales through normal retail channels, and things like mid-price and budget (see page 168 for what those are). Note, if you have a 75% of statutory rate on top-line product, you’ll get a reduced percentage of that already reduced rate. For example, if you had a 75% rate on top-line, and a 75% rate on mid-price records, you’d only get 56.25% (75% of your 75% rate). Public Domain Arrangements. If a song is an arrangement of a public domain composition, the record company doesn’t want to pay you for it. Your argument is that songs like “Scarborough Fair” were extremely successful public domain songs, and if you’re brilliant enough to have this concept, you should be paid. (Sorry to use an old song, but I can’t think of anything more current.) The typical compromise is that you get a proportionate royalty for public domain material, in the same ratio that the performing rights organization (see page 230 for what those are) pays for the composition involved. In other words, if ASCAP pays you 50% of normal performance monies for the song (because they think your new contributions are worth 50%, and no one is paid for the public domain part), you get 50% of the mechanical rate. Everyone routinely accepts this, and a lot of forms will say this at the outset to save time. Non-controlled Songs. This is a particularly nasty piece of business. The rate limits may be imposed not just on controlled compositions, but on every composition in the album. Most companies don’t do this, but there’s still a few out there. If you’re using what we call outside songs (meaning songs that aren’t controlled compositions), this may be impossible to deliver—the owner of the outside songs will insist on being paid in full. Remember, you can’t force an owner to license you for a first use, and even if the song was used before, the owner doesn’t have to take less than the full statutory rate (they can tell you either to drop the song or get a compulsory license at the full statutory rate). The only way to pay less for outside songs is to either threaten (“We’ll drop your song if you don’t reduce the rate”) or grovel (“Please, I’m just a poor little singer”). But if you’re dealing with major songwriters, unless your records generate truckloads of money, the publisher will tell you to blow it out your kazoo. The real problem is not whether you can deliver the outside song at a reduced rate, because the record companies know there’s a lot of times when you can’t. The real problem is how the company punishes you when you don’t. Essentially, if they have to pay more than your contractual limit because of outside songs, the company carves the excess out of your hide (meaning it reduces the mechanicals going to you, and if that’s not enough, it goes hunting for more). Canada There’s no compulsory mechanical rate in Canada. Instead there’s a contractual agreement between the Canadian Recording Industry Association and a number of major publishers setting the “industry royalty rate.” Currently it’s 8.3¢ for the first five minutes, plus 1.66¢ for each additional minute or fraction thereof (all in Canadian pennies). So now you’re a virtuoso of the single-song limit. You’re ready to conquer: MAXIMUM RATE PER ALBUM, EPS, AND SINGLES The maximum-per-album concept also applies to EPs and singles, but for simplicity, I’m only talking about albums here. EPs and singles are exactly the same computations, except that the limit is usually five times the single-song rate for EPs, and two times for singles. Standard Clause. All controlled composition clauses impose a limit on the total mechanicals for each album, which is called a cap . It’s usually ten times 75% of the minimum statutory rate (or ten times the full rate if your per-song rate isn’t reduced). This is known as a ten times rate , meaning you get ten times the single-song rate. Note this is an added restriction , which is independent of the per-song limit. In other words, you must deliver the label a license for each song at the specified single-song rate, no matter what the total album limit, but you can’t exceed the total album limit no matter what you pay for each individual song. This is to keep you from delivering, for example, fourteen songs at a 75% rate, which totals more than the company is willing to pay, even though you haven’t exceeded your per-song limit. Just like single songs, the album limits are based on a multiple of the minimum statutory rate (the rate for songs five minutes and under), as we discussed on page 278 . Nowadays, it’s not uncommon for albums to have anywhere from eleven to fourteen songs. So you should always try for more than a ten-times limit. As we discussed, this is really only a CD/vinyl issue, and since that’s a very small part of the business, it’s been a lot easier to get eleven or twelve times the full statutory rate, occasionally a little more. Wherever you end up, it’s pretty easy to slide right over the limit. So lemme show you what happens when you do. Just for consistency in the examples, I’m going to assume that you have a maximum album rate of ten times 100% of the 12¢ statutory rate, meaning $1.20. Under the standard clause, if you deliver more than ten songs, the excess reduces the mechanical royalties on songs you control. For example, if you deliver twelve songs that are all controlled, the ten-times cap means you only get $1.20 for all the songs. In other words, each song earns $1.20 divided by twelve, or 10¢ per song (instead of 12¢ per song, which is what you’d get if there were no cap). Special Packages/Bonus Tracks. Some artists do special packages exclusively for certain retailers (like Target or Walmart). In exchange for this exclusive product, the retailer gives the product a push. For example, they feature your album in their brochure, give your product better placement in the store, or discount your record if the customer buys a pepper grinder in the shape of a bowling pin (maybe not the last one). To make these packages “special,” they always have more songs than the normal album (usually two or three tracks that we call bonus tracks ). The problem is, unless you wrote all the songs by yourself, the folks who wrote those extra songs have this habit of wanting to be paid mechanicals for them, but your contract limits the mechanicals the company has to pay out so there’s no room to pay them without reducing your mechanicals. Normally this is worked out at the time, but with enough clout, you can get something in your deal. Of course, as the writer, you want to be paid in full for the extra songs, but second place is that the company can’t reduce your mechanicals on the original (not bonus) album because of the extras. For example, if you had ten times full stat for the normal album, and they add two tracks, maybe you don’t get paid mechanicals on the extra tracks, even though you wrote them, but you won’t be reduced by third parties who do get paid on them. If your clause doesn’t cover special packages, be sure to raise these issues as soon as there’s talk of extra tracks. If not, the controlled composition clause will clip your ponytail into a buzz cut. Multiple Albums. While these are mostly dead except for box sets (as we discussed on page 119 ), controlled composition clauses don’t distinguish between normal albums and multiple albums. If you don’t raise the issue, you’ll have a ten-song mechanical limit on a multiple album that has twenty or more songs. As noted earlier, all the economics of a box set are negotiated separately, so you won’t likely get much in your normal deal for this. Just be sure mechanicals are part of the discussion if you do a box set, because these are mostly physical product, where this clause is alive and well. Videos Every controlled composition clause requires you to license your songs for use in videos. There are two aspects: 1. Single-song videos. Single-song videos that play on YouTube, Vevo, etc., are considered promotional, because they’re free to the consumer and help drive your career. So every controlled comp clause requires you to let the company put these out. While it’s customary to give the label a free single-song video license, you should get paid by the DSPs (as we discussed, the DSPs pay publishers to stream your videos). The record companies of course have no problem with you getting paid by the DSPs because it doesn’t cost them anything. However, they’ll want a free license to stream your videos on the label website. The labels also want a free sync license to put your music in a single song video (see page 252 for what a sync license is). Note that sync rights are separate from the right to stream; sync is a fee to duplicate your music into the video, as opposed to a fee for streaming the video, which is a distribution right. Currently, the custom is to give a free sync license under your controlled comp clause, since you’re getting paid for the streaming. Another issue concerns lyric videos , which not surprisingly are videos that show the lyrics on-screen while the song is playing. Most publishers want an additional royalty for lyric videos, arguing that the sync license which allows labels to put your song in the video is separate from a license that lets them reprint the lyrics (which is true). The labels fight back fiercely. Your controlled comp clause says they get lyrics for free, and results vary with clout. More often than not, you won’t get anything extra for the lyric video, but if there is an additional fee, it’s a couple of percentage points in addition to the normal rate. 2. Everything besides single-song videos. These are things like concert videos, TV appearances, and compilations of single-song videos. The rate for streaming these videos is the same as single-song videos. The rates for physical and downloads of audiovisual materials still make their way into your controlled comp clause, even though everything besides streaming is drying up like a forgotten potted fern. But here they are: For DVDs and video downloads, independent publishers (those not subject to a controlled composition clause, who can charge what the market will bear), usually get in the range of 8¢ to 15¢ per song, though some get a percentage of PPD (8% to 10% or so). Also, there’s almost always a 10,000–15,000 unit guarantee, meaning, for example, if you get 12¢ per unit and a 10,000 unit guarantee, you would get a $1,200 advance (12¢ × 10,000 units). In addition, publishers often get something called a fixing fee , which is a nonrecoupable payment for fixing the song in the video (basically, a sync license). These fees range from $250 to $500 per song. You won’t get market rate for these uses in a controlled comp clause, but you should be able to get paid. The common compromise is around 8¢ per song if it’s a penny rate, or 8% if it’s a percentage of PPD. You virtually never get a fixing fee. These are the rates as I write this; given that the audio-only mechanical rate has recently gone up to 12¢, these may change as well. But then again they might not, because there’s almost no market for DVDs and video downloads. I mean, would you want one? Other Freebies The other freebie that the label will want under your controlled comp clause is the right to use your song in advertising and promoting your record and on their website. Producers When you hire a producer who is also a writer, you’ll discover that the major producers don’t want to be bound by the rates in your controlled composition clause but rather insist on a full rate for their songs, no matter what. This used to be a big deal, but since it’s now only physical and downloads, the companies are more flexible. If you have enough clout, or if the producer doesn’t, you can get them to go along with your controlled comp rates completely. Even if the producer has moderate clout, if your clause is reasonably favorable, you can sometimes get them to sign off. But a number of the major producers insist on a full rate with no cap on the number of songs. For example, if you have a ten times cap, but twelve songs on the album, you’ll only be paid 10 ⁄ 12 of the full rate. If the producer insists on a 100% mechanical rate for their writing, you’ll have to eat the difference between that and the 10 ⁄ 12 rate you’re getting for those songs. However you end up, even if you give the producer a full rate, be sure they agree to be bound by the other terms of your controlled comp clause (videos, marketing, etc.). Also, you’ll want your producer to agree they’ll go along with all other uses of the song that you want to make (for example, film sync licenses, usages in your concert videos, commercials, etc.), on the same terms that you get. In other words, they have to issue a license to a user on the same terms that you license that user, and they of course get their share of the money. Without this provision, they could stop you from doing a concert video with their song in it, or block you from a use of the song that could mean a lot of money. Answer to question on page 265 : While it was a stupid business deal, the subpublisher’s thinking was that (a) it would gain prestige from having landed a major catalog (which prestige immediately vanished when everyone found out what an idiotic deal they made); (b) even though the subpublisher kept no piece, it collected the monies and held them for a period of six months, which meant the company could earn interest on them (this was back in the days when interest meant more than it does now); and (c) the publisher got a bump on its share of black-box monies, which were very meaningful in those days and not customarily shared with the song owner. If you find someone ready to make a deal like this, give me a call because I still have that land in Florida for sale.