Chapter 20: Even More Advanced Copyright Concepts 20 Even More Advanced Copyright Concepts SOUND RECORDING COPYRIGHTS This section is about copyrights in sound recordings , with the artist’s voice and musicians on it ( not the musical compositions they’re singing). It may surprise you to know that, prior to 1972, the United States had no copyright protection for a sound recording itself. That includes Elvis, the Beatles, and all kinds of other classics. And before 1972, pirates were making a lot of money by duplicating sound recordings and not paying anyone. This smelled like thievery (which it was), but stopping them was difficult because there was no federal copyright in the sound recording. Because of that, the companies had to sue pirates under the copyright laws of individual states, and they did reasonably well, but it was clunky. In 1972, Congress enacted a full-fledged, legitimate copyright law provision dealing with piracy (which is now Section 114 of the Copyright Act). It prohibits the unauthorized duplication or dubbing of a sound recording that was created on or after February 15, 1972, by creating a copyright in the actual recording. (This is in addition to a separate copyright in the musical composition.) It is imaginatively called a sound recording copyright . One of the most interesting aspects of this sound recording copyright is what it did not protect. While it’s clear you can no longer duplicate the actual recording without consent, the sound recording copyright doesn’t prohibit a “sound-alike” recording, no matter how closely you duplicate the original. In other words, nothing in the sound recording copyright stops you from hiring a singer to imitate the original artist, or hiring a band that sounds just like the original recording, regardless of how close you come. Of course, you still need to license the song, and you have to disclose that the recording isn’t the original. If you didn’t label your record as an imitation, you’d run afoul of various trademark and unfair practices laws, which deal with the proper labeling of goods (and thus stop you from defrauding the public into thinking they’re getting the original when they’re not). These are the same laws that stop you from calling a cereal Froot Loops if it’s not made by Kellogg’s, even if it has exactly the same ingredients. Not So Happy Together So the sound recording copyright is good for recordings created after February 15, 1972, but there’s no federal sound recording copyright for pre-’72 recordings. Recently, that little quirk came back to life like some monster in an old horror movie. And the villains this time? The digital streaming services (our old friends, the DSPs). Remember, as we discussed on page 144 , the DSPs pay out each month on the basis of how many plays you get compared to the total number of plays on their service. Well, these oldies had a fair amount of play, so they should’ve gotten some of the money. But the DSPs said they didn’t have to pay for them because there was no sound recording copyright. Accordingly, they allocated a share of their revenue to the old recordings (based on their number of plays), carved that chunk out of what they paid everyone else, and stuck it in their pockets. As you can imagine, the recordings of classic artists get a helluva lot of play on these services, so those owners of those recordings (as well as the copyright recordings that were getting shorted on money) were not pleased. This led to a number of lawsuits over this issue, essentially using the state laws that were used to shut down pirates before the sound recording copyright existed. The biggest case was headed by the RIAA (an industry group that represents the major labels), and there was also a class action led by the Turtles ( class action means a lawsuit on behalf of everyone similarly situated, which in this case meant everyone who owned pre-1972 recordings and wasn’t suing on their own). The result was mixed—some states said there was protection, while others said there was no performance right in the sound recordings. The cases have settled, but all this litigation shook up the streaming services enough to support a section of the Music Modernization Act (see page 248 ) called the Classics Protection and Access Act . The Classics Protection section says it’s not creating a copyright for the pre-1972 recordings, but instead gives the owner of a pre-’72 recording the same rights to collect money as owners of post-’72 recordings. In essence, for interactive services, this means the labels now license pre-1972 recordings to the DSPs on the same terms as post-’72 recordings. For non-interactive uses, the Classics Act says the pre-1972 recordings are subject to the same compulsory licenses as the new stuff, meaning they get paid by SoundExchange at the same rate as post-’72 recordings. Interestingly, unlike federal copyrights, state law copyrights have no expiration; so in theory the old stuff could have been subject to payment longer than the new recordings (like… forever). Under the MMA, however, there is now a limit on how long you can get paid for pre-1972 recordings. Specifically, it’s ninety-five years from first publication (meaning release to the public), but there are some extensions of this ninety-five years for older recordings. If a recording was first published before 1923, you had until December 31, 2021. If it was first published between 1923 and 1946, you get five years beyond the ninety-five years. If it was first published between 1947 and 1956, you get an extra fifteen years on top of the ninety-five. The party’s over for all pre-1972 recordings on February 15, 2067 (ninety-five years after the effective date of the 1972 sound recording act). HOW TO TERMINATE A COPYRIGHT TRANSFER IN YOUR SPARE TIME, FOR FUN AND PROFIT As noted on page 323 , the 1976 Copyright Act lets you undo any deal (for songs created on or after January 1, 1978) thirty-five years later (we’ll talk about the pre-1978 songs later, on page 348 ). So if you sell your song to a publisher and have a lifetime of regret, you can get it back after thirty-five years by merely sending a notice (remember, this is only for the United States; you’re still stuck for the rest of the world). Here’s how to do it. You can give a notice of termination no less than two years, nor more than ten years, before the date that your termination is to be effective, and that effective date has to be within five years after the end of the thirty-five-year period. To be more precise, if the grant of the work covers publication, which it almost always does, the right to terminate is effective on the sooner of forty years from the grant, or thirty-five years from publication. This protects you even if the work is never published. This is easier to understand if we use some actual years. For example, if a copyright was transferred and published in 2000: Year of Transfer/Publication: 2000 Years in Which Termination Can Be Effective (From 35 to 40 Years After Transfer/Publication): 2035 to 2040 First Year That Notice Can Be Sent (10 Years Before First Possible Effective Date): 2025 Last Year That Notice Can Be Sent (2 Years Before Last Possible Effective Date): 2038 If you really want to know the details, take a look at Sections 203 and 304 of the Copyright Act, which you can find online. The Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, which we discussed on page 323 , added some frills to this. They are: 1. Previously, only a living author, surviving spouse, or surviving children or grandchildren could exercise the right of termination. Now, if none of them are alive, the author’s estate can do the honors. 2. There’s a second bite at termination rights for pre-1978 copyrights, which I’ll go over in a minute. Remember, as we discussed previously, this termination only applies to U.S. rights. If you sold off your copyright in foreign territories, Quel dommage . Attempts to Avoid Termination As much as the publishers would love to avoid termination, Uncle Sam says, “No.” The copyright law says that nothing you do with the termination rights is valid until you actually have the rights back—in other words, you can’t sign them over to anyone until you actually have them in your fist. The only exception is that you can make a deal with the guy whose rights are about to be terminated after you’ve sent the notice. For example, if you send a notice to the publisher saying the termination is effective three years from now, you can enter into a contract with that publisher during the three years before the rights come back. This gives the current publisher a head start, because they can make a deal (and pay you for the rights) before anyone else can. EXTENSION RIGHTS Extension Recapture So Congress took care of folks who wrote songs in 1978 and after, by giving them the right to get out of a stupid deal after thirty-five years. But what about the oldsters who made stupid deals? There’s a transitional quirk thrown into the 1976 Copyright Act that takes care of the pre-1978 copyrights. (If you weren’t writing prior to 1978, or aren’t the heir of such a writer, you can skip to the next section on terminating sound recording copyrights. This isn’t mandatory; feel free to read this for your general education, but I don’t suggest driving or operating heavy machinery afterward.) As we touched on earlier, pre-1978 copyrights lasted for a period of fifty-six years (the twenty-eight plus twenty-eight we discussed on page 322 ). The 1976 act extended that to a period of seventy-five years, meaning it added nineteen years to the fifty-six years that already existed. And as we also discussed, this has now been extended to ninety-five years. In 1976, in addition to extending the life of the copyrights to seventy-five years, your congresspeople gave the author (or his or her heirs) the right to take back the new nineteen years. The recapture procedure is similar to that for termination rights of post-1978 copyrights (the right to terminate after thirty-five years, which we discussed in the prior section). It’s done by giving a notice no sooner than two years, and no more than ten years, before the beginning of the nineteen years (i.e., no more than two years, or later than ten years, before the end of the fifty-sixth year). For example, if a song was first published in 1972, the fifty-six years expire in 2028. So, beginning in 2018 (ten years before the end of the fifty-six years), and ending in 2026 (two years before), you can give a notice to be effective in 2026. After the effective date of the notice, the nineteen years added to the copyright (the extension from 2026 to 2045) belong to the author, or his or her heirs. As with post-1978 termination rights, this is only for the United States. The rest of the world has still gone bye-bye. Just like the thirty-five-year termination, Congress gave the original publishers a nice perk. The law says that, before the extended term actually comes into effect, but after giving a termination notice, the person who got the original grant can make a new deal for the added nineteen years. So the original publisher has the ability to buy the rights at least two years before any outsider, and therefore has an advantage in getting them. Unless the publisher has really been a jerk during the first fifty-six years (which is no small “unless”), it can usually keep the copyrights. Now enter the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998, which added twenty years to the copyright term and made the extension period thirty-nine years after the original fifty-six years (in other words, a total of ninety-five years). They also threw in (at no extra charge) an added bonus: If your right to recapture came up before October 27, 1998, and you forgot to send the termination notice, you get another bite. At any time within five years after expiration of the first seventy-five years (the old fifty-six, plus the nineteen you blew), you can get back the newly added twenty years. What Exactly Did I Just Get Back? So you’ve sent your notices, waited until the magic date to get your rights back, and are ready to rumble. What exactly did you just get handed? Can you now do anything you want with those rights? Well, it’s not exactly simple… A provision of the termination/extension law rights says that the original publisher can no longer license any new works, but they can continue exploiting derivative works created while they owned the song (see page 217 for a definition of derivative works ). And for a while, this derivative work exception looked like it was going to be a loophole you could drive a truck through. The opening act was a U.S. Supreme Court case involving the appropriately titled song “Who’s Sorry Now.” (If you want to look it up, it’s Mills Music v. Snyder , 105 SCT 638 [1985].) In this case, the publisher (Mills Music) acquired the rights to “Who’s Sorry Now” from Ted Snyder and two other writers. Snyder went to that Great Songbook in the Sky, and in 1978, his heirs exercised their right to terminate the last nineteen years. (So much for the idea that the initial publisher can hang on to the songs.) After termination, Mills Music argued that all of the records it had licensed were derivative works, and therefore it had the right to collect mechanical royalties for sales of these records after termination. As you can imagine, Mr. Snyder’s heirs took a contrary view. They felt these rights should come back to them, so they could then license the record companies (and get all the money). The decision flipped back and forth until it came to the U.S. Supreme Court (known to its friends as “the Supremes”). In a closely divided decision (five of the nine justices in favor, four opposing), the Supreme Court found that indeed the records were derivative works, and that the money from them went to Mills Music, the terminated publisher. Mr. Snyder’s heirs had the right to money from future recordings, but not the existing ones. Sorry, all you little Snyders. After Mills Music , two other cases dealt with the scope of a publisher’s right to hang on to derivative works. The first was Woods v. Bourne Co ., 603 F.2d 978 (2d Cir. 1995), where the terminated publisher argued that every piece of printed music was based on the original lead sheet, and therefore the right to put out sheet music forever belonged to the old publisher (see page 297 for what a lead sheet is). The court kicked the publishers’ butts on that one, holding that new versions of printed music weren’t derivative works and therefore belonged to the new publisher. Next came Fred Ahlert Music Corp. v. Warner Chappell Music, Inc ., 155 F.3rd 17 (2d Cir. 1998), where the court made the derivative work exception even narrower. In that case, the mechanical license issued by the first publisher was for a specific catalog number, and then the same recording was reissued under a different catalog number. The court found that the reissue was not covered by the first license, so the new publisher of the song could issue the mechanical license for it (and get the dough). Recently, there’s been an argument that language in the Music Modernization Act means that income from the streaming of recordings made while a publisher had the rights can be collected by that publisher essentially forever after the termination. The Copyright Office recognized that the language could be read this way and proposed a rule stating that the writer gets to collect this income after termination. At the time of this writing, the rule is only tentative, and there’s intense lobbying efforts on both sides. Also, a Copyright Office rule is not binding law, so there could be court battles over this one. Action to come. Sound Recording Copyright Terminations The right to terminate transfers of sound recordings, which started coming up in 2013 (thirty-five years after the 1978 act), is a fascinating area. What’s happening is that artists are sending termination notices to record companies, and the companies are fighting back. Since the earliest days, record contracts have all had language that says the sound recordings are “works for hire,” and remember there’s no termination right for works for hire. (Take a look back at page 319 if you want a refresher on “works for hire.”) To be a work for hire, however, you need more than just that language. As we discussed previously, the work has to fall into one of several specific categories (see page 320 ). One of the “work for hire” categories is a “collective work,” and the record companies argue that recordings are contributions to a collective work (an album) and are therefore works for hire. They also throw in any other arguments they may have in each specific situation (for example, the form or timing of the notice might have been defective). In virtually every instance of which I’m aware, the companies and artists have come to an agreement to settle the claims. The companies offer better terms under the deal (higher royalty, advances, etc.), and the artist generally goes along. In part, this is because a fight would be incredibly expensive, and it’s also because the stakes for the record labels are very high. If they get a court decision that says recordings aren’t works for hire, it could cost them all their old recordings. So they will fight to the death. On the artist side, however, they’re only fighting about a few recordings that many times don’t earn enough in the United States to justify the expense of litigation (remember terminations are only for the U.S.). Also looming in the background is the idea that neither side necessarily wants a court result—if it favors the company, the artist is stuck with an old deal, and if it favors the artist, the companies lose massively on their catalog. So they compromise. A few years ago, a class action was filed in New York on behalf of artists over this very issue. A “class action” means that it covers everyone who’s similarly situated, so it’s more economical for them to band together for an expensive fight. A common example is something like a class lawsuit on behalf of everyone who bought gas from XYZ stations while XYZ was illegally overcharging. Maybe everyone gets back only $30, which is not worth a legal fight, but if there are millions of them, they can fight as a class. Before you can go forward with a class action, however, there are some technical hurdles you have to jump. The first is that you need to form a class that’s qualified to sue (this is decided by the court, who has to “certify” that the class is entitled bring the suit). One requirement of being a valid “class” is that the members of the class have a common question that is capable of a common answer. In other words, they all must have the same claim, so that the decision would apply to all of them. In late breaking news at the time I’m writing this, a New York court held that the group suing over recordings couldn’t be certified as a “class,” because the specific facts varied in each situation. I would expect an appeal, so there may be more action here. THE COPYRIGHT NOTICE The copyright notice (other than for sound recordings) is a © followed by the year of copyright (the year that the work was first fixed in tangible form). The symbol for sound recordings is Ⓟ. Look for these on your vinyl records. And on your CDs if you still have any. The copyright notice is much less significant under the 1976 Copyright Act than they were under the old law, because the consequences of leaving it off, or making a mistake in it, are no longer very serious. (Under the old law, you could lose your copyright.) It’s not worth getting into all the niceties, but nowadays a notice basically just protects you from someone saying they had no idea the materials were copyrighted—in other words, they can’t say they were an “innocent infringer.” (You don’t get a free pass if you’re an innocent infringer, but it could affect how much you have to pay if you get nailed.) For songs, the © copyright notice is primarily significant for printed music (digital and physical). That’s because you need only put a notice on “visibly perceptible copies” of something. Since you can’t “see” a song by looking at a digital file, CD, or vinyl, there’s no need to have a copyright notice for the song. So why do you see copyright notices on CDs and vinyl? Good question! The reasons are: (a) it’s the sound recording copyright notice; (b) sometimes the lyrics are printed inside, and since they are “visually perceptible,” you need a copyright notice; and (c) there is a copyright in the album cover artwork. REGISTRATION AND DEPOSIT The Myth It’s a myth that you get a copyright by registering your work with the Copyright Office. As we discussed, you get a copyright by fixing the work in tangible form. However, registering a copyright with the Copyright Office gives you certain legal tidbits you don’t otherwise have (we’ll discuss those next), so you should always do it if you’re going to commercially exploit your work. But the failure to register doesn’t affect the validity of your copyright. So if you’re a beginning songwriter, it’s probably not worth the money until someone bites. The old trick of mailing a copy of the work to yourself actually accomplishes something. It’s sometimes called a “poor man’s copyright,” but that’s not true. Remember, you already have the copyright by putting it in tangible form. The only thing you get from mailing it to yourself is a clearly established date on which you created your work. So if someone rips it off at a later date, you can prove your work was created before theirs. If you’re going to do this, send it by certified mail and don’t get excited and open it when it arrives; store it in a safe place, and let a judge open it if someone ever gets cute. Having a date-stamped digital file accomplishes the same thing, though I’m told (anecdotally, not reliably) that digital dates could be manipulated. If that’s true, then this evidence isn’t as strong as a letter. If you’ve posted your song to a website, that’s pretty reliable evidence, but you have to be sure the site keeps track of the date, and of course you need the site to still be in business when you have an issue. Why Register? Let me count the ways… If your work is going to be commercially exploited (released on streaming or in a physical format, used in a film, a commercial, etc.), you should register with the Copyright Office. If you don’t, you lose the following goodies: 1. You can’t collect compulsory license royalties (see page 218 ). 2. As we discussed earlier, you can’t file an infringement action unless you’ve first registered the copyright. That means you can’t recover damages or stop someone from using your song until you’ve registered. You’re allowed to wait and register just before you file the lawsuit, but it’s a better idea to take care of it as soon as you know there’s going to be a recording (because of numbers 3, 4, and 5 below). 3. A Supreme Court case held that you must have a registration in your hand before you can file your lawsuit. (For Supreme Court stalkers, the case is Fourth Estate Public Benefit Corporation vs. Wall-Street.com , 138 S.Ct. 720 [2018]). Before that case, some of the lower courts said it was enough for you to have filed the registration, but now it actually has to be issued (meaning the Copyright Office has officially accepted it in their records) before you can sue. And waiting for the government to grind your registration through its gears can mean a delay of up to nine months after you send in the registration form. Which means a delay before you can file your lawsuit. So today it’s an even better idea to get going early if you’ve got a record coming out. 4. If you don’t register within five years after first publication of the work, you lose the legal presumption that everything in the registration is valid. This mumbo jumbo basically means that if you do register within the five years, a court will assume that everything in your registration is true, and the infringer has the burden of proving it’s not. If you don’t, you have to prove it’s true. 5. You can’t recover attorney’s fees, nor can you get statutory damages (see page 339 ), unless you registered before the infringement happened. You can get the forms you need to register (and in fact register electronically) at www.copyright.gov , unless that’s now become a dating site. Deposit A separate requirement from registration is the obligation to deposit copies of “the best edition” of your work within three months after publication. If you don’t, there’s no loss of copyright, but there are penalties and fines. The purpose of this is to keep the Library of Congress overflowing with tons of crap that nobody has ever heard of, and the system works quite well. You can deposit CDs, vinyl, or sheet music for songs, or if your work is unpublished, or published only in electronic form, you can deposit electronically. MORAL RIGHTS In a number of countries outside the United States, there’s a legal concept known as moral rights , or by the snooty term droit moral (which in French means “moral rights,” and in Czech means “no parking”). The concept (among others) is that an author can stop any mutilation of his or her work, even though they may have parted with it long ago. For example, the creator of a painting (even though it’s been sold four or five times) could stop someone from cutting it into smaller paintings, drawing mustaches on it, etc. Similarly, the author of a musical work can stop substantial changes in the music or lyrics. And you also get the right to stop someone from falsely attributing your work to someone else. The United States has never recognized a moral rights concept for music (even though it is required to do it under something called the Berne Convention, which is a multi-nation treaty designed to protect creative works). The best we’ve done is a limited moral right for paintings and fine art. Accordingly, to the extent you want any protection, you gotta put it in your songwriter/publisher contract, as we discussed on page 305 . And, in virtually every contract, you’ll be asked to waive (meaning give up) your moral rights, which you’ll have to do. If you’re in a group, keep straight ahead. If not a group, go to Chapter 22, “What’s in a Name?,” on page 375 . If you’re bored, take a nice walk around the block.