Revenue for
software and
SaaS
Handbook




US GAAP



May 2024
______

frv.kpmg.us
Contents
Foreword ......................................................................................................... 1

About this publication ....................................................................................... 2

Software and SaaS industry overview .............................................................. 5

A. Scope .......................................................................................................19

B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer ........................................64

C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract ....................134

D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price ..................................................288

E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations
   in the contract ........................................................................................389

F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
   performance obligation ...........................................................................503

G. Contract modifications ............................................................................627

H. Contract costs ........................................................................................693

Some basic reminders...................................................................................751

KPMG Financial Reporting View ....................................................................759

Acknowledgments ........................................................................................761




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                      Revenue for software and SaaS             1
                                                                                                          Foreword




Your guide to software
and SaaS revenue
recognition
Revenue recognition continues to be top of mind for software and software-as-
a-service (SaaS) entities because of the complex nature of their arrangements
and evolving business models.
Topic 606 requires software and SaaS entities to make significant judgments
and estimates to account for their revenue contracts. In particular, the evolving
business practices continue to create new and unique challenges when
identifying performance obligations and allocating the transaction price to those
performance obligations. Contract modifications also continue to give rise to
questions.
This Handbook provides detailed technical guidance on applying Topic 606 (and
Subtopic 340-40) to software licensing and SaaS arrangements. We address a
wide variety of software and SaaS specific issues and questions that have
arisen during and since the adoption of Topic 606. We compare the effects of
Topic 606 to those under legacy US GAAP for many longstanding software and
SaaS practice issues.
This industry-specific Handbook is a complement to KPMG Handbook, Revenue
recognition, which illustrates how Topic 606 applies to common transactions,
provides examples about common scenarios, and explains our emerging
thinking on key interpretative issues.
We hope this Handbook will continue to serve as a valuable tool to this industry.


Scott Muir and Nick Burgmeier
Department of Professional Practice, KPMG LLP




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                      Revenue for software and SaaS             2
                                                                                               About this publication




About this publication
Purpose
The purpose of this Handbook is to assist you in understanding Topic 606
(revenue from contracts with customers) and Subtopic 340-40 (costs from
contracts with customers), as they apply to customer arrangements in the
software and SaaS industry.
This Handbook focuses on applying Topic 606 and Subtopic 340-40 to software
and SaaS arrangements and on those areas with particular relevance thereto. It
is intended for use by preparers and other interested parties with a working
knowledge of the revenue and contract cost guidance in Topic 606 and
Subtopic 340-40.
KPMG Handbook, Revenue recognition, provides additional, non-industry
specific guidance on applying Topic 606, Subtopic 340-40 and Subtopic 610-20
(gains and losses from the derecognition of nonfinancial assets).


Organization of the text
Each chapter of this Handbook includes excerpts from the FASB’s Accounting
Standards Codification® and overviews of the relevant requirements. Our in-
depth guidance is explained through Q&As that reflect the questions we are
encountering in practice. We include examples to explain key concepts, and we
explain the changes from legacy US GAAP.
Our commentary is referenced to the Codification and to other literature, where
applicable. The following are examples:
— 606-10-25-16 is paragraph 25-16 of ASC Subtopic 606-10.
— ASU 2014-09.BC87 is paragraph 87 of the basis for conclusions to
  Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09.
— TRG Agenda Paper No. 30 is agenda paper no. 30 from the meeting of the
  International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and the FASB’s Joint
  Transition Resource Group for Revenue Recognition (TRG) held in March
  2015.
— SAB Topic 13 is SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 13.


Terminology
Throughout this Handbook, the terms ‘software licensing arrangement’ and
‘SaaS arrangement’ are used. A ‘software licensing arrangement’ refers to an
arrangement in which a software license is transferred to the customer in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-54(a). In contrast, ‘SaaS arrangement’
refers to an arrangement that, even if the contract states that a license to
software is conveyed, a license does not exist in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-55-54(a) because the hosted software does not meet the
criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                      Revenue for software and SaaS             3
                                                                                               About this publication



This distinction is important because, under Topic 606, the licensing
implementation guidance, including that related to sales-based and usage-based
royalties, does not apply to SaaS arrangements. SaaS arrangements are
accounted for as service obligations, subject to the general revenue model. The
first section of the ‘Software and SaaS Industry Overview’ and Chapter A –
Scope, discuss the requirements for distinguishing between a software
licensing arrangement and a SaaS arrangement in further detail.


Accounting literature
Unless otherwise stated, references to the revenue standard and/or Topic 606
comprise all of the following Accounting Standards Updates issued prior to
Topic 606’s original mandatory adoption date:
— No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)
— No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal
  versus Agent Considerations (Reporting Revenue Gross versus Net)
— No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606):
  Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing
— No. 2016-11, Revenue Recognition (Topic 605) and Derivatives and Hedging
  (Topic 815): Rescission of SEC Guidance Because of Accounting Standards
  Updates 2014-09 and 2014-16 Pursuant to Staff Announcements at the
  March 3, 2016 EITF Meeting
— No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-
  Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients
— No. 2016-20, Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606,
  Revenue from Contracts with Customers
— No. 2017-13, Revenue Recognition (Topic 605), Revenue from Contracts
  with Customers (Topic 606), Leases (Topic 840), and Leases (Topic 842):
  Amendments to SEC Paragraphs Pursuant to the Staff Announcement at
  the July 20, 2017 EITF Meeting and Rescission of Prior SEC Staff
  Announcements and Observer Comments
— No. 2017-14, Income Statement—Reporting Comprehensive Income
  (Topic 220), Revenue Recognition (Topic 605), and Revenue from Contracts
  with Customers (Topic 606): Amendments to SEC Paragraphs Pursuant to
  Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 116 and SEC Release No. 33-10403


Pending content
In some cases, the Codification is subject to content that becomes
effective after the revenue standard. For example, the amendments to the
Codification made by Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-13, Financial
Instruments—Credit Losses (Topic 326), are reflected in this Handbook as
pending content.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                      Revenue for software and SaaS             4
                                                                                               About this publication



When an excerpt from the Codification is affected by pending content:
— the specific sentences that have been superseded are underlined; and
— the amended sentences are included at the end of the excerpt, marked as
  pending content.
The transition dates for pending content are shown based on their general
applicability to public entities (P) and non-public entities (N). See the relevant
Topic to determine the specific transition requirements.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                5
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview




Software and SaaS
industry overview
Is there a software license?
Whether the customer obtains a software license affects the guidance that the
entity will apply in accounting for the arrangement.
Instead of selling a software license and related services to the customer, a
software entity might make the same software functionality available to the
customer through a cloud computing (e.g. software-as-a-service, or SaaS)
arrangement.
Under legacy US GAAP, a software license was present in a cloud computing
arrangement only if the following criteria were met:
— the customer had the contractual right to take possession of the software
  from the entity at any time without significant penalty; and
— it was feasible for the customer to host the software independent of the
  software entity – e.g. to host the software themselves or in a third party’s
  environment.
If not, the entire arrangement was a service arrangement. In our experience,
most cloud computing arrangements were accounted for as service contracts
under legacy US GAAP.
Topic 606 applies the same tests as legacy US GAAP to determine if a contract
with a customer includes a software license. As a result, entities will likely
reach similar conclusions for cloud computing arrangements about whether the
contract includes a software license.
Under Topic 606, whether the customer obtains a software license affects the
guidance that the entity will apply in accounting for the arrangement. If a
software license is not granted (i.e. the arrangement is for SaaS), the licensing
implementation guidance does not apply, including the specific guidance on
sales- or usage-based royalties promised in exchange for a license.
Instead, the entity applies the general revenue model to determine the
recognition of revenue for SaaS arrangements. Application of the general
revenue model will result in a time-based, ratable recognition of fixed fees in
those arrangements. The accounting for variable consideration (e.g. transaction-
based fees) is discussed in the section ‘Sales- or usage-based royalties’.
Some contracts will include both software licensing elements subject to the
licensing implementation guidance and SaaS elements subject to the general
revenue model.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                6
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Performance obligations
A software entity’s determination of the performance obligations in the contract
may accelerate software license revenue recognition compared with legacy
US GAAP.
Under Topic 606, an entity accounts for the performance obligations in the
contract – i.e. the performance obligation is the unit of account for revenue
recognition.
To determine the performance obligations in a contract, an entity first identifies
the promised goods or services – e.g. a software license, SaaS, professional
services, post-contract customer support (PCS), or specified upgrade or
additional product rights. These may be promised to the customer explicitly or
implicitly (e.g. by the entity’s customary business practices), and/or promised to
the customer’s customers (e.g. a promise to provide technical support or
unspecified upgrades to customers that purchase the entity’s software from
a reseller).
Promised goods or services do not include administrative or other activities that
an entity undertakes to set up a contract; for example, certain SaaS installation
or activation activities or a promise to provide additional copies of a delivered
software application that is not a promise to deliver additional licenses might
not transfer a promised good or service to the customer. Judgment will be
required in some cases to distinguish promised goods or services from
administrative tasks or set-up activities. However, an entity’s identification of
the promised goods or services in a software or a SaaS arrangement is likely to
be similar to that under legacy US GAAP in most cases.
Once an entity identifies the promised goods or services, it then determines
whether they are distinct from each other. Under Topic 606, two or more goods
or services (e.g. a software license and professional services or PCS, or SaaS
and professional services) are distinct from each other, and therefore separate
performance obligations, when they are not in effect inputs to a single
combined item that is the object of the contract.
In making this determination, an entity considers factors such as whether:
— it is providing a significant integration service (using its expertise to create a
  combined output using the promised goods or services as inputs);
— one good or service significantly modifies or customizes the other;
— the goods or services are highly dependent on, or highly interrelated with,
  each other.
Unlike legacy US GAAP for software licensing arrangements, vendor-specific
objective evidence of fair value (VSOE) does not factor into an entity’s
determination of the performance obligations in the contract. In many cases,
this difference will accelerate software license revenue recognition compared
with legacy US GAAP. For example, a software license is separable from PCS
under legacy US GAAP only if the entity has VSOE for the PCS (as well as for
any other undelivered elements in the contract). VSOE is established for PCS
based on stand-alone sales (e.g. stand-alone PCS renewals).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                7
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Software/SaaS and professional services
Consistent with legacy US GAAP, an on-premise software license and
significant customization or modification of that software will generally not be
distinct from each other; therefore, they will be accounted for as a single
performance obligation. Conversely, a software license and non-complex
implementation services will generally be distinct from each other and
accounted for as separate performance obligations; this is especially, but not
exclusively, the case if the services can be performed by alternative providers.
However, judgment may be required in assessing whether a software license
and professional services are separate performance obligations in other
circumstances. Topic 606 may result in combining a software license and
services even when the services are not essential to the software’s
functionality. For example, some entities may conclude that services are not
distinct from the software license when they do not customize or modify the
software, but nonetheless are more complex in nature (e.g. complex
interfacing), proprietary and integral to the customer’s ability to derive
substantive benefit from the software.
The considerations for a SaaS arrangement that includes professional services
will be similar to those for on-premise software licensing arrangements. SaaS
entities will also need to evaluate whether upfront activities are a promised
service to the customer or merely set-up activities. Set-up activities, which can
range from simply ‘activating’ the customer to other activities performed by the
SaaS provider that enable the customer to access the SaaS from its IT platform,
are activities that do not provide incremental benefit to the customer beyond
that which the customer receives from access to the hosted application.


Software and PCS
Software licensing arrangements often include PCS. This typically includes
technical support and the right to receive unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements. Legacy US GAAP treated PCS as a single element.
Under Topic 606, the components of PCS (e.g. technical support and the right
to unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements) will typically be distinct
from each other, and therefore separate performance obligations. However, if
they are provided over the same period and have the same pattern of transfer
to the customer – e.g. if they are both stand-ready obligations satisfied ratably
over the PCS period – a software entity could account for both elements as if
they were a single performance obligation.
In most cases, software, technical support and rights to unspecified updates or
upgrades/enhancements (or rights to unspecified additional software products)
will be distinct from each other, even if the technical support and the right to
unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements is mandatory. However,
Topic 606 illustrates that, in limited fact patterns, a software license may not be
distinct from a right to unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements (or
unspecified additional software products) if those updates are critical to the
customer’s ability to derive benefit and value from the license (e.g. in an anti-
virus scenario). In those limited cases, the software and the right to the
unspecified items would be a single performance obligation.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                8
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Specified upgrades or additional software products
What constitutes a specified upgrade or an additional software product is not
expected to change substantively from legacy US GAAP, including the effect of
product roadmaps on determining whether a specified upgrade or enhancement
has been implicitly promised to the customer.
However, the elimination of the legacy VSOE requirement for undelivered items
in a contract means that entities will no longer be required to defer substantially
all of the revenue in the contract until any specified upgrades or additional
software products are transferred to the customer, as was typical under legacy
US GAAP. This is because specified upgrades and specified additional product
rights will generally be distinct from the original software license and other
elements (e.g. technical support or unspecified upgrade/additional product
rights) in a software licensing arrangement.
In SaaS arrangements, judgment will be required to determine whether a
promise to provide additional or upgraded functionalities is an additional
promised service, or merely part of providing the ongoing SaaS – e.g. keeping
the hosted application current and relevant. An important part of that judgment
might be whether the promised functionalities are significantly different,
significantly improved and/or independent from the original functionalities.


Hybrid SaaS/Cloud arrangements
It is increasingly common for arrangements to include both an on-premise
software element and a SaaS element – e.g. an on-premise software application
and a SaaS application or a SaaS application with an ‘offline’ mode. In many
cases, those two elements will be distinct, but in others they will not.
If the customer cannot derive benefit from its right to use the on-premise
software without the SaaS element, or can only derive an insignificant portion
of the benefit the customer would be able to obtain from using the on-premise
software together with the SaaS element, the on-premise software license is
not distinct from the SaaS element.
In situations where the on-premise software and the SaaS element each have
substantive functionality, a key consideration in deciding whether the two
elements are distinct may be whether the two elements are transformative to
each other rather than merely additive to each other. Transformative means that
the two elements together provide a combined functionality or utility that is
greater than or different from the aggregate functionality or utility of the
elements independently.
Explained another way, if the customer obtains a license to Software Product A
and access to SaaS element B, the distinct analysis would generally hinge on
whether the combination of A + B equals AB (i.e. the combined functionality is
merely the sum of the two elements’ individual functionalities), in which case
the two elements would generally be distinct from each other, or whether the
combination of A + B equals X (i.e. the combination of the two elements results
in incremental or changed functionalities that don’t exist in either element
separately) or ABx (i.e. the combination of the elements produces an enhanced
level of functionality that is greater than the sum of the two elements’ individual
functionalities).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                9
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview


If the on-premise software and the SaaS element are transformative to each
other, rather than merely additive, we would generally conclude that the two
elements are not distinct from each other and account for the combined item as
a service arrangement, rather than as a license.

Determining stand-alone selling price
VSOE is no longer the only basis for allocating contract revenue. Software
entities often agree to provide more than one software license or a combination
of software licenses and services to a customer in an arrangement. Multiple-
element arrangements may include licenses to additional software products,
specified upgrades or enhancements, PCS or other services. Under legacy
US GAAP for software licensing arrangements, revenue was allocated between
contract elements on the basis of VSOE and, typically, to separate license
elements on a residual basis.
Under Topic 606, the transaction price is allocated to the performance
obligations based on the stand-alone selling price of the goods or services
underlying each performance obligation. If VSOE (or another observable stand-
alone selling price) does not exist for a performance obligation, the entity
estimates the stand-alone selling price.
For many software entities that have VSOE for their software-related elements
(e.g. PCS or professional services), this may not result in a significant change;
this is principally because Topic 606 permits use of a residual approach to
determine the stand-alone selling price for performance obligations (or bundles
of performance obligations) that are sold at widely varying or uncertain prices
(e.g. enterprise software licenses) when the other elements of the contract
have observable prices. However, the requirement to determine estimated
stand-alone selling prices for each performance obligation in the contract will be
challenging for many other entities that either:
— do not sell their software-related elements on a stand-alone basis – e.g.
  customers always purchase PCS that is co-terminus with a term software
  license; or
— have multiple software licenses – e.g. licenses to multiple software
  products or a license and one or more specified upgrades – in their
  contracts that are not transferred to the customer at the same time.


Customer options
A customer option may be an additional performance obligation. However,
distinguishing a contractual option from a usage-based fee will require
judgment. Software entities may provide a customer option to acquire
additional goods or services (including new software licenses or additional
licenses of previously delivered software). Under legacy US GAAP, a customer
option to purchase additional copies (or seats, users, etc.) of products licensed
by and delivered to the customer under the same arrangement was not subject
to the guidance for a significant, incremental discount.
In contrast, under Topic 606, a customer option is an additional performance
obligation if it provides the customer with a ‘material right’ that the customer
would not have received without entering into the contract – e.g. a discount




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                10
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview


unavailable to customers that had not entered into a similar contract with the
entity.
Distinguishing a contractual option to acquire additional licenses of a previously
delivered software product from a usage-based fee will require judgment in
many cases. The following should be distinguished:
— an option to acquire additional rights to use the software (e.g. increased
  capabilities); the acquisition of which constitutes an additional purchasing
  decision by the customer and requires the entity to grant those additional
  rights; versus
— a customer’s exercise of rights that it already controls (e.g. processing
  transactions using the licensed software) for which the consideration is
  variable (i.e. in the form of a usage-based fee).


Timing of revenue
Revenue from licenses
The software license is subject to the new licensing guidance. If a license is not
distinct, an entity considers the licensing guidance in applying the general
revenue recognition model to the performance obligation that includes the
license (e.g. in determining an appropriate measure of progress towards
complete satisfaction of the combined performance obligation that includes
the license).
Topic 606 divides intellectual property (IP) into two categories.
— Functional IP. IP that has significant stand-alone functionality – e.g. the
  ability to process a transaction, perform a function or task, or be played or
  aired. Functional IP derives a substantial portion of its utility (i.e. its ability to
  provide benefit or value) from its significant stand-alone functionality. Topic
  606 states that software is functional IP, along with biological compounds
  or drug formulas, completed media content (e.g. films, television shows or
  music) and patents underlying highly functional items.
— Symbolic IP. IP that does not have significant stand-alone functionality and,
  therefore, substantially all of the utility of symbolic IP is derived from its
  association with the licensor’s past or ongoing activities. Symbolic IP
  includes brands, trade names such as a sports team name, logos and
  franchise rights.
Revenue attributable to a software license that is a separate performance
obligation will be recognized at the point in time that the customer obtains
control of the license. A customer does not obtain control of a software license
before the later of (1) the point in time the customer is provided a copy of the
software (or one is made available) and (2) the beginning of the license period.
If a software license is not a separate performance obligation (e.g. the software
license is combined with professional services), the entity will apply the general
revenue recognition model to determine whether the combined performance
obligation should be recognized over time or at a point in time; and, if
recognized over time, what the appropriate measure of progress should be.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                11
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Electronic delivery
A copy of the software has been provided (or otherwise made available) to the
customer when the customer:
— takes possession of the software via download;
— has been provided with the access code (or key) that allows the customer
  to take immediate possession of the software; or
— has the right to request such access code (or key) at any time and the
  transfer of such key is effectively administrative or perfunctory.
In a hosting arrangement that includes a software license, control of the license
will generally be considered to have been transferred to the customer at the
point in time that the hosting services commence.


License renewals
Consistent with revenue attributable to an initial software license, revenue
attributable to a software license renewal cannot be recognized before the
beginning of the renewal period. This is a change from legacy US GAAP under
which revenue attributable to a software license renewal was recognized when
the renewal was agreed to by the parties (as long as the other revenue
recognition requirements were met).


Revenue from other elements
Rights to unspecified software updates or upgrades/
enhancements
The timing of revenue recognition for unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements and professional services will be similar to that under legacy
US GAAP.
Software entities often provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements to customers on a when-and-if available basis as long as the
customers have purchased PCS.
Under legacy US GAAP, the right to unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements was not considered to be a separate element of the
arrangement; instead, it was considered part of PCS. The portion of the fee
allocated to PCS was generally recognized ratably over the term of the PCS
arrangement.
Under Topic 606, a promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements (or unspecified additional software products) is generally a
stand-ready obligation to provide those items on a when-and-if available basis
that is satisfied ratably over the PCS period. However, an entity’s customary
business practice of fulfilling its promise to provide updates, upgrades or
enhancements at specific points in time during the PCS period (e.g. regularly
providing one updated release each year) might suggest the underlying nature
of the entity’s promise is not a stand-ready obligation satisfied over time but,
rather, a promise to deliver an implied number of updates or upgrades/
enhancements at discrete points in time during the contract period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                12
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Professional services
Software arrangements often include both software and service elements
(other than PCS-related services). The services may include training, installation
and/or consulting. Consulting services often include implementation support,
software design or development or the customization or modification of the
licensed software.
Under legacy US GAAP, revenue allocated to a service element that qualified
for separate accounting was recognized as services were performed; or, if no
pattern of performance was discernible, on a straight-line basis over the period
during which the services were performed.
Under Topic 606, entities must meet one of three criteria to recognize revenue
over time; if none of those criteria are met, recognition occurs at a point in time.
Entities providing professional services in SaaS or software licensing
arrangements, either as a separate performance obligation or part of a
combined performance obligation, will find in most cases that professional
services meet at least one of the over-time recognition criteria.


Sales- or usage-based royalties
Sales- or usage-based fees promised in exchange for a software license will
typically not be subject to the general guidance on variable consideration.
However, exceptions may arise if the royalty is also promised in exchange for
other goods or services. Software entities often enter into arrangements that
include sales- or usage-based royalties.


Sales- or usage-based royalties in a software
licensing arrangement
Topic 606 contains an exception to the general guidance on variable
consideration for sales- or usage-based royalties that are (1) promised solely in
exchange for a license of IP or (2) promised in exchange for a license of IP and
other goods or services when the license is the predominant item to which the
royalty relates. Topic 606 states that the license may be the predominant item
“when the customer would ascribe significantly more value to the license than
to the other goods or services to which the royalty relates.”
Fees earned from the royalty in either of these cases are recognized at the later
of when the subsequent sales or usage occurs, and the satisfaction or partial
satisfaction of the performance obligation to which the royalty relates.
In most cases, fees earned from a sales- or usage-based royalty promised in
exchange for a software license that is a separate performance obligation will
be recognized when the subsequent sales or usage occur. However,
exceptions may arise if the royalty is also promised in exchange for other goods
or services, regardless of whether the software license is distinct. In addition,
any guaranteed royalties (e.g. a fixed minimum amount) are accounted for as
fixed consideration and will be recognized in the same manner as any other
fixed consideration in the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                13
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Royalty reporting on a lag no longer permissible
Under legacy US GAAP, some software entities recognized sales- or usage-
based royalties on a ‘lag’ basis – i.e. they recognized revenue in the period
subsequent to that in which the sales or usage occurred because they do not
receive reporting about the royalties that the customer owes until the
subsequent period.
Under Topic 606, lag reporting is not permitted. If subsequent sales or usage of
the entity’s software is not known, it must be estimated using the model for
estimating variable consideration.


Usage-based fees in a SaaS arrangement
In a SaaS arrangement, the royalties exception does not apply because the
arrangement does not contain a software license. Consequently, the general
variable consideration guidance in Topic 606 applies rather than the sales- and
usage-based royalties exception. Unlike legacy US GAAP, Topic 606 neither
limits fees that can be recognized to only those that are fixed or determinable,
nor precludes the recognition of contingent revenue.
The new variable consideration guidance may require the SaaS provider to
make an estimate of the total usage-based fees (e.g. per transaction fees) that
it will earn over the course of the contract, subject to the variable consideration
constraint, unless:
— the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient can be applied that permits an entity to
  recognize revenue in the amount to which it has a right to invoice the
  customer. This applies if that amount corresponds directly with the value to
  the customer of the entity’s performance completed to date. A significant
  upfront fee or a usage-based fee rate that changes during the contract
  period in a manner that cannot be directly linked to a change in value of the
  entity’s services to the customer may preclude use of this expedient; or
— the SaaS performance obligation is determined to be a series of distinct
  service periods (e.g. a series of distinct daily, monthly or annual periods of
  service), and allocation of the fees earned to each distinct service period
  based on the customer’s usage each period would reasonably reflect the
  fees to which the entity expects to be entitled for providing the SaaS for
  that period. Consistent with the as-invoiced practical expedient, a usage-
  based fee rate that differs from period to period during the contract may
  prevent allocation of the fees earned in a single distinct service period to
  that period, as might a discount or rebate that is based on metrics that
  cross multiple distinct service periods. However, unlike the as-invoiced
  practical expedient, an upfront fee generally will not affect whether this
  condition is met.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                14
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Combination of contracts
Whether multiple contracts are combined for software and SaaS entities will be
similar to legacy US GAAP in most cases.
Software entities may include multiple promised goods or services in separately
executed contracts with the same customer. Under legacy US GAAP, a
question arose as to whether the separate contracts should be accounted for
individually as distinct arrangements or whether the separate contracts were, in
substance, a multiple-element arrangement subject to the revenue allocation
provisions.
Under Topic 606, entities are required to combine contracts if (1) the contracts
are entered into at or near the same time with the same customer (or related
parties) and (2) any one of three criteria is met:
— the contracts are negotiated as a package with a single commercial
  objective;
— the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the price
  or performance of the other contract; or
— the goods or services promised in the contracts (or some goods or services
  promised in each of the contracts) are a single performance obligation.
Although this is similar to legacy US GAAP, it may result in some different
conclusions about whether multiple contracts are combined for software and
SaaS entities.


Comparison to current software revenue guidance
Legacy US GAAP software revenue guidance evaluated whether two or more
contracts between an entity and a customer should be combined and
accounted for as a single arrangement based on six indicators. Some of the
indicators were similar to the criteria in Topic 606 – e.g. one of the indicators is
that the contracts are negotiated or executed within a short timeframe of each
other. However, none of the six indicators is determinative, which could lead to
differences in practice under Topic 606.


Comparison to current guidance applied by SaaS
providers
Legacy US GAAP general revenue guidance, which was applicable to SaaS
providers, contains a rebuttable presumption that contracts entered into at or
near the same time should be combined. Because Topic 606 does not contain
this presumption and additional criteria must be met, it is possible for entities to
come to different conclusions.


Contract costs
Software and SaaS entities will no longer have the choice to expense
commissions as incurred if certain criteria are met.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                15
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Capitalization of contract costs
Software entities frequently incur either or both:
— costs to obtain a customer contract, including renewal contracts and costs
  to obtain contract modifications, that are incremental (i.e. would not have
  been incurred but for obtaining the contract) – e.g. sales commissions and
  fringe benefits directly attributable to payment of that commission, such as
  additional 401(k) match or payroll taxes. Costs that are not incremental to
  obtaining a customer contract are expensed as incurred unless capitalized
  in accordance with other US GAAP. The following are not incremental costs
  (not exhaustive):
      —      costs that are incurred regardless of whether the contract is obtained –
             e.g. costs incurred in negotiating or drafting a contract;
      —      costs that depend on further substantive performance by the
             commission recipient, such as continued employment at a future date
             when all or a portion of the commission will be paid; and
      —      payments based on operating metrics like EBITDA or operating income
             that are not solely linked to obtaining one or more customer contracts.
— costs to fulfill a contract – e.g. costs associated with set-up activities that
  do not provide a service to the customer in a SaaS arrangement.
Under SEC guidance related to legacy US GAAP, an entity could elect to
capitalize direct and incremental contract acquisition costs (e.g. sales
commissions) in certain circumstances, although many entities expensed such
costs as incurred.
In contrast, under Topic 606, incremental costs to obtain a customer contract
and costs to fulfill a contract that meet specified criteria are required to be
capitalized as contract cost assets if they are recoverable. Costs to obtain a
contract are not required to be capitalized if the expected amortization period,
which includes specifically anticipated renewals, is 12 months or less. An entity
electing not to capitalize costs to obtain a contract should apply this practical
expedient consistently across all of its business units or segments.
The requirement to capitalize contract acquisition and fulfillment costs will be
new to most software entities and some SaaS providers and may be complex
to apply, especially for entities with many contracts and a variety of contract
terms and commission and incentive structures. And for those SaaS providers
that currently capitalize contract acquisition costs, they may find the types of
costs that can be capitalized will differ because only costs that are incremental
to obtaining the contract are capitalizable – allocable costs are not, unless they
meet the criteria to be capitalized as fulfillment costs.
Those entities that have not previously tracked the costs of acquiring a contract
may find it difficult to determine which costs to capitalize, both for the transition
amounts on adoption (regardless of the transition method used) and in the
ongoing application of Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                16
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview



Amortization and impairment of contract cost assets
Contract cost assets are amortized consistent with the transfer to the customer
of the goods or services to which the asset relates, which means that:
— if a contract cost asset relates to two or more goods or services that have a
  different pattern of transfer to the customer (e.g. one transferred at a point
  in time and another provided over time), entities should either (1) allocate
  the contract cost asset to those multiple goods or services on a systematic
  and rational basis or (2) select a single measure that best reflects the ‘use’
  of the asset as the goods and services are transferred; and/or
— the entity amortizes a contract cost asset over more than the contract
  period when the asset relates to goods or services that will be provided
  under an anticipated contract that the entity can identify specifically. For
  example, an entity will amortize a commission paid for a service contract
  over the contract period plus any anticipated renewal periods unless the
  entity also pays commissions for renewals that are commensurate with the
  commission paid on initial service contracts. ‘Commensurate’ refers to the
  commission paid as compared to the margin the entity will earn.
For those SaaS providers that currently capitalize contract acquisition costs,
they may find that the amortization period for those costs changes because of
the Topic 606 requirement to amortize such costs over specifically anticipated
renewal periods (in many cases), which precludes the current practice of
amortizing such costs over only the non-cancellable contract period.
Contract cost assets are assessed for impairment in accordance with specific
guidance in Topic 606, which assesses the remaining balance of a contract cost
asset against the remaining amount of consideration (including variable
consideration) that the entity expects to receive from the customer less direct
costs to fulfill the related goods or services.


Other considerations
Extended or advanced payments
Software entities often enter into arrangements where payment of a significant
portion of the license fee is not due until after expiration of the license, or more
than 12 months after delivery of the software.
Under legacy US GAAP, the arrangement fee was presumed not to be fixed or
determinable for those arrangements. Unless sufficient evidence existed to
overcome this presumption, revenue was generally not recognized until the
payments became due and payable.
Under Topic 606, extended payment terms do not preclude revenue recognition
so long as collectibility of those payments is considered probable and a contract
exists between the parties. Instead, such terms may indicate that there is a risk
of a future price concession, which might lead to the conclusion that the
transaction price is variable. In that case, the entity will need to consider
whether it expects to provide a concession, and the transaction price would be
subject to Topic 606’s variable consideration guidance, including the variable
consideration constraint.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                17
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview


Where extended payment terms are granted, the entity needs to consider
whether a significant financing component exists in the contract. Similarly,
where a customer prepays in advance for PCS, hosting services or SaaS (and
that prepayment relates to a service period greater than one year), the entity
will also need to consider whether a significant financing component exists (i.e.
whether there is a valid business reason for the advance payment other than
the provision of financing and, if not, whether the financing component is
‘significant’ to the contract). The presence of a significant financing component
in either situation would affect the amount of revenue to be recognized by the
entity under the contract, with an offsetting amount of interest income
(deferred payment terms) or interest expense (advanced payment terms).
Whether a significant financing element exists is evaluated at the contract-level;
it is not assessed at the performance obligation level or in ‘aggregate’ for
the entity.


Discounted or free services
SaaS providers frequently offer customers free or discounted services in return
for entering into longer-term SaaS contracts (e.g. the customer may receive
three free or six discounted months of the SaaS service in return for entering
into a three-year contract or may receive discounted implementation services).
Under legacy US GAAP, arrangement consideration was limited to only non-
contingent amounts (often referred to as the ‘contingent cash cap’). That
means, in a SaaS contract that provides the customer with three free or six
discounted months of service or discounted implementation services, revenue
recognized as those free or discounted services are provided was limited to
amounts not contingent on the provision of future services.
In contrast, Topic 606 does not have a contingent revenue prohibition.
Therefore, SaaS providers will generally allocate additional revenues to free or
discounted services provided at the outset of the arrangement compared with
legacy US GAAP, which will accelerate overall revenue recognition
under contract.


Concessions
Software entities may have a history of granting price or other concessions –
e.g. free licenses or services. Under legacy US GAAP, a history of granting price
or other concessions meant that the arrangement fees were not fixed or
determinable. Revenue under arrangements for these entities may have been
significantly deferred, even beyond the point at which cash was received, and
was recognized only once the arrangement consideration was deemed to be
fixed or determinable.
Under Topic 606, because the fixed or determinable notion does not exist, a
history of price or other concessions will generally not result in the complete
deferral of revenue. Instead:
— An expectation, based on relevant history or otherwise, of a price
  concession creates variability in the transaction price for a contract. The
  existence of variable consideration does not affect the timing of revenue
  recognition; instead, it affects the amount of revenue that is recognized
  when (or as) the entity satisfies its performance obligation(s).



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                18
                                                                              Software and SaaS industry overview


— An expectation of providing free goods or services creates additional
  performance obligations that are accounted for in the same manner as any
  other performance obligations in the contract. For example, a history of
  granting free technical support to customers in periods subsequent to the
  initial support period likely creates an additional performance obligation in
  the contract for the expected free support periods; therefore, a portion of
  the transaction price is allocated to this performance obligation and is
  recognized when (or as) this performance obligation is satisfied.
If an entity grants a concession that was not anticipated at contract inception,
that concession will be accounted for as a contract modification.


Sales through distributors or resellers
Many software products are sold to end customers through distributors or
resellers. In that case, the entity may grant price concessions through price
protection, or accept returns if the distributor is unable to sell the products.
Under legacy US GAAP, some software entities that sell through distributors or
resellers concluded that the fees for their software sales were not fixed or
determinable because of the risk of granting price concessions or of accepting
product returns. Those entities recognized revenue upon sell-through of the
software to the end customer.
Under Topic 606, either an expectation of price concessions or returns is
accounted for as variable consideration. And because variable consideration
does not affect the timing of revenue recognized from the satisfaction of a
performance obligation (only the amount), software entities in distributor or
reseller arrangements cannot default to a sell-through method under Topic 606.
Rather, an entity is required to determine the total amount of consideration to
which it expects to be entitled – e.g. the number of units it expects not to be
returned and the amount it expects to be entitled to, after any price
concessions, for those units – subject to the variable consideration constraint.
The entity recognizes that amount at the time control of the good or service
transfers to the distributor or reseller. Certain repurchase rights that exist in
some distributor relationships – e.g. the right of the entity to buy back a good
until the point in time it is sold to an end customer – will affect when control of
the good or service transfers. After control of the good or service transfers, the
transaction price is updated each reporting period until the uncertainty for
concessions and returns is resolved.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                       Revenue for software and SaaS                 19
                                                                                                            A. Scope




A.   Scope
     Questions and Examples

     Scope of Topic 606
     Q&A A10                   How does the scoping guidance in Topic 606 apply to
                               arrangements that include parts in the scope of Topic 606 and
                               parts in the scope of the leases guidance?
                               Example A10.1: Partially in scope transaction
     Q&A A15                   Can an entity have more than one customer for a
                               transaction?
     Q&A A20                   What constitutes a ‘collaborative arrangement’ and what
                               determines whether a collaboration partner is a customer of the
                               software entity?
                               Example A20.1: Collaborative arrangement that is within the
                               scope of Topic 606 for one party but not the other party
     Q&A A30                   Are funded software development arrangements within the
                               scope of Topic 606?
                               Example A30.1: Not a funded software development
                               arrangement
                               Example A30.2: Funded software development
                               arrangement (1)
                               Example A30.3: Funded software development
                               arrangement (2)
                               Example A30.4: Income-producing arrangement under
                               Subtopic 730-20 (1)
                               Example A30.5: Income-producing arrangement under
                               Subtopic 730-20 (2)
                               Example A30.6: Entity can be required to repay funding
                               Example A30.7: Technological feasibility established before
                               contract inception
     Q&A A40                   Are nonmonetary exchanges of software within the scope of
                               Topic 606?
                               Example A40.1: Nonmonetary exchanges of software
     Q&A A50                   What is the accounting for an exchange of software licenses
                               between entities in the same line of business to facilitate sales
                               to customers, or to potential customers, other than the parties
                               to the exchange?
     Q&A A60                   Can an entity record proceeds received from the settlement of
                               a patent infringement with another party as revenue?




     © 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
     member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 20
                                                                                                       A. Scope


Q&A A65                   How should an entity evaluate whether using a portfolio
                          approach would materially differ from applying Topic 606 on a
                          contract-by-contract basis?
Q&A A66                   Can a portfolio approach be used for some aspects of the
                          revenue model, but not all?
Scope of licensing implementation guidance and illustrations
Q&A A70                   Can the customer have a ‘contractual right to take possession
                          of the software at any time during the hosting period’ if no such
                          right is explicitly provided for in the contract (or in any contract
                          or other agreement that is combined with that contract)?
Q&A A80                   Criterion (a) in paragraph 985-20-15-5 requires the customer to
                          have the right to take possession of the software at any time
                          during the hosting period without significant penalty. How
                          should entities interpret ‘at any time’ in the context of this
                          criterion?
Q&A A90                   Paragraph 985-20-15-6(a) explains that having the right to take
                          possession of the software ‘without significant penalty’
                          includes ‘the ability to take delivery of the software without
                          incurring significant cost’. What costs should an entity consider
                          in determining if there is a significant penalty and what would
                          be considered significant?
Q&A A100                  What considerations should be made in determining whether
                          the customer can use the software separately from the entity’s
                          hosting services without a significant diminution in utility or
                          value when evaluating criterion (b) in paragraph 985-20-15-6?
                          Example A100.1: Software license or SaaS (1)
                          Example A100.2: Software license or SaaS (2)
                          Example A100.3: Software license or SaaS (3)
Q&A A110                  If software will be hosted on entity servers that are leased by
                          the customer, is there a software license?
Q&A A120                  Is the conclusion about whether a software license is present
                          in a contract with a customer affected by the customer’s or the
                          software entity’s use of a third-party hosting service?
                          Example A120.1: Software license or SaaS




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 21
                                                                                                       A. Scope



Scope of Topic 606

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

10-4 This guidance specifies the accounting for an individual contract with a
customer. However, as a practical expedient, an entity may apply this guidance
to a portfolio of contracts (or performance obligations) with similar
characteristics if the entity reasonably expects that the effects on the financial
statements of applying this guidance to the portfolio would not differ materially
from applying this guidance to the individual contracts (or performance
obligations) within that portfolio. When accounting for a portfolio, an entity shall
use estimates and assumptions that reflect the size and composition of the
portfolio.
15-1 The guidance in this Subtopic applies to all entities.
15-2 An entity shall apply the guidance in this Topic to all contracts with
customers, except the following:
a. Lease contracts within the scope of Topic 840, Leases
b. Contracts within the scope of Topic 944, Financial Services—Insurance.
c. Financial instruments and other contractual rights or obligations within the
   scope of the following Topics:
       1. Topic 310, Receivables
       2. Topic 320, Investments—Debt Securities
       2a. Topic 321, Investments—Equity Securities
       3. Topic 323, Investments—Equity Method and Joint Ventures
       4. Topic 325, Investments—Other
       5. Topic 405, Liabilities
       6. Topic 470, Debt
       7. Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging
       8. Topic 825, Financial Instruments
       9. Topic 860, Transfers and Servicing.
d. Guarantees (other than product or service warranties) within the scope of
   Topic 460, Guarantees.
e. Nonmonetary exchanges between entities in the same line of business to
   facilitate sales to customers or potential customers. For example, this
   Topic would not apply to a contract between two oil companies that agree
   to an exchange of oil to fulfill demand from their customers in different
   specified locations on a timely basis. Topic 845 on nonmonetary
   transactions may apply to nonmonetary exchanges that are not within the
   scope of this Topic.
Pending Content
Transition Date: (P) December 16, 2018; (N) December 16, 2021 ¦ Transition
Guidance: 842-10-65-1
a.     Lease contracts within the scope of Topic 842, Leases.
15-2A An entity shall consider the guidance in Subtopic 958-605 on not-for-
profit entities—revenue recognition—contributions when determining whether




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 22
                                                                                                       A. Scope


a transaction is a contribution within the scope of Subtopic 958-605 or a
transaction is within the scope of this Topic.
15-3 An entity shall apply the guidance in this Topic to a contract (other than a
contract listed in paragraph 606-10-15-2) only if the counterparty to the contract
is a customer. A customer is a party that has contracted with an entity to
obtain goods or services that are an output of the entity’s ordinary activities in
exchange for consideration.
20 Glossary
Customer
A party that has contracted with an entity to obtain goods or services that are
an output of the entity’s ordinary activities in exchange for consideration.
Revenue
Inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity or settlements of its
liabilities (or a combination of both) from delivering or producing goods,
rendering services, or other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major
or central operations.


General scoping considerations
Topic 606 replaces substantially all previous US GAAP revenue recognition
guidance, including all of the revenue recognition guidance in Topic 605,
Revenue Recognition, and in Subtopic 985-605, Software – Revenue
Recognition. However, ASU 2014-09 did not supersede the requirements in
Subtopic 605-35 or Subtopic 985-605 that pertain to recognizing:
— a provision for losses on long-term construction- and production-type
  contracts, such as contracts involving the significant production,
  modification or customization of software; and
— a loss if it becomes probable that the amount of the transaction price
  allocated to an unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied performance obligation
  will result in a loss on that performance obligation.
Topic 606 applies broadly to all contracts to deliver goods or services to a
‘customer’, including contracts to license software to customers (i.e. software
licensing arrangements) and contracts to provide customers with ‘software-as-
a-service’ (i.e. SaaS arrangements). However, a contract with a customer is
outside the scope of Topic 606 if it comes under the scope of other specific
requirements in US GAAP. In some cases, Topic 606 will be applied to part of a
contract or, in certain circumstances, to a portfolio of contracts.
A ‘customer’ is a party that has contracted with an entity to obtain goods or
services that are an output of the entity’s ordinary activities in exchange for
consideration.
The definition of a customer focuses on an entity’s ordinary activities. However,
Topic 606 does not define ‘ordinary activities’ and, in defining ‘revenue’, refers
to an entity’s ‘ongoing major or central operations’. The concept of ongoing
major or central operations refers to how an entity attempts to fulfill its basic
function in the economy of producing and distributing goods or services at
prices that enable it to pay for the goods and services it uses and to provide a
return to its owners. [ASU 2014-09.BC53, 606-10 Glossary].




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 23
                                                                                                       A. Scope



Contracts outside – or partially outside – the scope of
Topic 606
Topic 606 excludes from its scope:
— lease contracts;
— contracts within the scope of Topic 944, Financial Services – Insurance;
— financial instruments and other contractual rights or obligations in the scope
  of other specific guidance;
— guarantees (other than product or service warranties); and
— nonmonetary exchanges between entities in the same line of business that
  facilitate sales to customers other than the parties to the exchange.
A contract with a customer may be partially in the scope of Topic 606 and
partially in the scope of other accounting guidance (e.g. a software licensing or
SaaS arrangement that includes a lease of related hardware). If the other
accounting guidance specifies how to separate or initially measure one or more
parts of the contract, then the entity first applies those requirements.
Otherwise, the entity applies Topic 606 to separate or initially measure the
separately identified parts of the contract. Topic 606, therefore, constitutes
‘residual guidance’ for separating non-Topic 606 elements from Topic 606
elements within a contract and allocating consideration to those elements.
That is, it is applied to the part of the contract that is not within the scope of
another Topic.
The following flow chart highlights the key considerations when determining
the accounting for a contract that is partially in the scope of Topic 606.


   Is contract fully in the
                                                                                        Apply other Topics
  scope of other Topics?                                 Yes



                  No


                                             Does the other Topic
   Is contract partially in                                                           Apply the other Topic to
                                            have separation and/or
    the scope of another                                                              separate and/or initially
                                    Yes      initial measurement              Yes
           Topic?                                                                      measure the contract
                                            guidance that applies?

                                                            No


                                                                                      Exclude amount initially
                  No                          Apply Topic 606 to
                                                                                       measured under the
                                            separate and/or initially
                                                                                       other Topic from the
                                             measure the contract
                                                                                         transaction price

    Apply Topic 606 to
    contract (or part of
    contract in scope)




Topic 606 excludes from its scope contracts with a collaborator or a partner that
is not a customer, but rather shares with the entity the significant risks and
benefits of participating in an activity or process. However, a contract with a
collaborator or a partner, or part of that contract, is in the scope of Topic 606 if




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 24
                                                                                                       A. Scope


the counterparty meets the definition of a customer for part or all of the
arrangement. That is, a contract with a customer may be part of an overall
collaborative arrangement and Topic 606 is applied to that part.
It will be important for an entity that engages in collaborative arrangements to
analyze whether the other parties to these arrangements are customers for
some activities. Making this assessment will require judgment and
consideration of all applicable facts and circumstances of the arrangement.


Portfolio approach
Topic 606 and Subtopic 340-40 are generally applied to an individual contract
with a customer. However, as a practical expedient, an entity may apply the
revenue model to a portfolio of contracts (or performance obligations) with
similar characteristics if the entity reasonably expects that the financial
statement effects of applying Topic 606 or Subtopic 340-40 to that portfolio
would not differ materially from applying it to the individual contracts (or
performance obligations) within that portfolio. Topic 606 and Subtopic 340-40
do not provide specific guidance on how an entity should assess whether the
results of a portfolio approach would differ materially from applying the new
guidance on a contract-by-contract basis. However, the Basis for Conclusions to
ASU 2014-09 (BC69) notes that the Boards did not intend for entities, in order
to use the portfolio approach, to have to quantitatively evaluate the accounting
outcomes from applying a portfolio approach and not applying a portfolio
approach.
In some circumstances when applying Topic 606, an entity will develop
estimates using a ‘portfolio of data’ to account for a specific contract with a
customer. For example, entities may use historical data from a population of
similar contracts to develop estimates about future sales returns, variable
consideration, or expected customer lives. Using a portfolio of data to develop
estimates required to apply the guidance in Topic 606 and Subtopic 340-40 is
not the same as applying the portfolio approach.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Scoping of software licensing arrangements and SaaS arrangements
In general, the guidance in Topic 606 applies to the same population of
software and SaaS contracts that is covered by the legacy US GAAP revenue
recognition guidance in Topic 605 and Subtopic 985-605.
However, unlike legacy US GAAP, under which software licensing
arrangements were subject to the revenue guidance in Subtopic 985-605 (or the
guidance in Subtopic 605-35 for arrangements that included the significant
production, modification or customization of software) and SaaS arrangements
were subject to the general guidance in Topic 605, all software contracts,
whether software licensing arrangements or SaaS arrangements, will be
subject to the requirements of Topic 606. Consequently, there is no guidance in
Topic 606 on whether software is incidental to a product or service and the
legacy guidance that previously distinguished software licensing arrangements




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 25
                                                                                                       A. Scope


from SaaS arrangements does not affect whether Topic 606 applies. However,
the legacy US GAAP guidance distinguishing software licensing arrangements
from SaaS arrangements (previously included in paragraphs 985-605-55-119
through 55-123, and now included in paragraphs 985-20-15-5 through 15-6) still
affects whether the licensing implementation guidance in Topic 606 applies to
the contract. The licensing guidance in paragraph 606-10-55-54(a) states that a
software license is not present in a hosting arrangement that does not meet the
criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5. The questions in this chapter beginning with
Question A70 address the application of that guidance.
Accounting for contracts partially in the scope of Topic 606
The guidance on separation and measurement for contracts that are partially in
the scope of Topic 606 is consistent with the legacy revenue guidance on
multiple-element arrangements.
Collaborative arrangements
The guidance about what constitutes a ‘collaborative arrangement’ in Topic 808,
Collaborative Arrangements, has not changed. Collaborative arrangements
continue to be defined as arrangements where:
— the parties are active participants in the arrangement; and
— the participants are exposed to significant risks and rewards that depend on
  the endeavor’s ultimate commercial success.
The guidance in Topic 808 does not address the recognition and measurement
of collaborative arrangements, while the guidance on presentation refers
entities to other authoritative literature or, if there is no appropriate analogy,
suggests that they apply a reasonable, rational and consistently applied
accounting policy election. However, Topic 808 was amended by ASU 2014-09
to require that parties to collaborative arrangements specifically consider
whether the guidance in Topic 606 is applicable. Topic 808 did not previously
require consideration of any specific revenue guidance; however, the
implementation guidance in section 808-10-55 (Example 1) now explicitly states
that an entity must consider whether the guidance in Topic 606 applies when
determining the appropriate accounting for a collaborative arrangement.



                   Question A10
                   How does the scoping guidance in Topic 606 apply
                   to arrangements that include parts in the scope of
                   Topic 606 and parts in the scope of the leases
                   guidance?
Interpretive response: Maintenance services provided on leased items are in
the scope of Topic 606 and therefore considered a non-lease component of the
contract, outside the scope of Topic 842; any component other than the right to
use the underlying asset is outside the scope of Topic 842. [842-10-15-28, 15-31,
ASU 2016-02.BC143]

Topic 842 provides guidance on separating lease from non-lease components
and measuring the consideration in the contract. Paragraph 842-10-15-38 also
refers to the transaction price allocation guidance in Topic 606 to allocate
consideration to the lease and non-lease components. [842-10-15-38]



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 26
                                                                                                       A. Scope


Topic 842 provides lessors with an optional practical expedient to not separate
lease from non-lease components of a contract if certain criteria are met. This
practical expedient is an accounting policy election made by class of underlying
asset if the following criteria are met: [842-10-15-42A]
— the timing and pattern of transfer to the lessee of the lease component and
  the non-lease component(s) associated with that lease component are the
  same; and
— the lease component, if accounted for separately, would be classified as an
  operating lease.
If a contract includes multiple non-lease components (one or more that meet
these criteria and one or more that do not), the lessor combines those
components that meet the criteria with the lease component and separately
accounts for each non-lease component that does not. [842-10-15-42C]
If the non-lease component(s) is (are) the predominant component(s) of the
combined component, the lessor should account for the combined component
under Topic 606 instead of the leases guidance in Topic 842. All other
combined components would be accounted for under Topic 842 as a single
lease component classified as an operating lease. This includes situations in
which the lease and non-lease component(s) are equally significant to the
contract. [842-10-15-42B]
See section 4.4.1 and 12.3 in KPMG Handbook, Leases, for further discussion
and analysis, including the disclosure requirements that apply when the
practical expedient is elected.



                   Example A10.1
                   Partially in scope transaction
ABC Corp. enters into a contract that includes a promise to provide SaaS
services to Customer and video equipment for Customer’s use. ABC first
applies Topic 842 to assess whether the arrangement contains a lease.
Scenario 1: Topic 842 practical expedient elected
ABC has adopted Topic 842 and determines that:
— use of the video equipment represents an operating lease; and
— the timing and pattern of transfer of the lease is the same as the SaaS
  services.
It elects to apply the practical expedient, and accounts for the lease and SaaS
services combined under Topic 606 because Customer would reasonably be
expected to ascribe more value to the SaaS services (non-lease component)
than to the right to use the video equipment (lease component) (see paragraph
842-10-15-42B).
Scenario 2: Practical expedient not elected
ABC elects not to apply the practical expedient in Topic 842, and therefore
accounts for the video equipment lease under Topic 842.
ABC first applies the applicable leases guidance to identify the lease component
and then applies the transaction price allocation guidance in Topic 606 to




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 27
                                                                                                       A. Scope


allocate consideration between the lease and non-lease components. Lastly,
ABC accounts for the allocated consideration for the leased video equipment
under Topic 842 and the SaaS services under Topic 606.
Scenario 3: No lease of the video equipment exists
If ABC concludes that the video equipment is not leased, then it accounts for
the entire contract under Topic 606. In applying Topic 606, ABC could find
that providing the equipment is distinct from providing the services (see
Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract).



                   Question A15
                   Can an entity have more than one customer for a
                   transaction?

Interpretive response: Yes. A revenue transaction may have multiple
counterparties that meet the definition of a customer. Identifying all of an
entity’s customers is important because, for example, the determination of
whether a counterparty is a customer affects the accounting for any
consideration payable to that counterparty.
For example, Marketing (agent) markets and incentivizes the purchase of
Merchant’s (principal) products by providing coupons to Merchant’s end
customer. Marketing might view both Merchant and Merchant’s end customer
as its customers. In that case, Marketing evaluates consideration payable to
Merchant’s end customer to determine whether it is consideration payable to a
customer. If it is, then Marketing accounts for that payment as a reduction of
revenue rather than as an expense. See Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the
transaction price for discussion of consideration payable to a customer.



                   Question A20
                   What constitutes a ‘collaborative arrangement’ and
                   what determines whether a collaboration partner is
                   a customer of the software entity?


                   Excerpt from ASC 808-10

20 Glossary
Collaborative Arrangement
A contractual arrangement that involves a joint operating activity (see
paragraph 808-10-15-7). These arrangements involve two (or more) parties that
meet both of the following requirements:
a.     They are active participants in the activity (see paragraphs 808-10-15-8
       through 15-9).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 28
                                                                                                       A. Scope


b. They are exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the
   commercial success of the activity (see paragraphs 808-10-15-10 through
   15-13).
> Other Considerations
15-5A A collaborative arrangement within the scope of this Topic may be
partially within the scope of other topics, including, but not limited to,
Topic 606 on revenue from contracts with customers.
15-5B A collaborative arrangement is partially in scope of Topic 606, if a unit of
account, identified as a promised good or service (or bundle of goods or
services) that is distinct within the collaborative arrangement using the
guidance in paragraphs 606-10-15-4 and 606-10-25-19 through 25-22, is with a
customer. An entity shall apply the guidance in Topic 606 to a unit of account
that is within the scope of that Topic, including the recognition, measurement,
presentation, and disclosure requirements. If a portion of a distinct bundle of
goods or services is not with a customer, the unit of account is not within the
scope of Topic 606.
• > Joint Operating Activity
15-7 The joint operating activities of a collaborative arrangement might involve
joint development and commercialization of intellectual property, a drug
candidate, software, computer hardware, or a motion picture. For example, a
joint operating activity involving a drug candidate may include research and
development, marketing (including promotional activities and physician
detailing), general and administrative activities, manufacturing, and distribution.
However, there may also be collaborative arrangements that do not relate to
intellectual property. For example, the activities of a collaborative arrangement
may involve joint operation of a facility, such as a hospital. A collaborative
arrangement may provide that one participant has sole or primary responsibility
for certain activities or that two or more participants have shared responsibility
for certain activities. For example, the arrangement may provide for one
participant to have primary responsibility for research and development and
another participant to have primary responsibility for commercialization of the
final product or service.
• > Active Participation
15-8 Whether the parties in a collaborative arrangement are active participants
will depend on the facts and circumstances specific to the arrangement.
Examples of situations that may evidence active participation of the parties in a
collaborative arrangement include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Directing and carrying out the activities of the joint operating activity
b. Participating on a steering committee or other oversight or governance
   mechanism
c. Holding a contractual or other legal right to the underlying intellectual
   property.
15-9 An entity that solely provides financial resources to an endeavor is
generally not an active participant in a collaborative arrangement within the
scope of this Topic.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 29
                                                                                                       A. Scope


• > Significant Risks and Rewards
15-10 Whether the participants in a collaborative arrangement are exposed to
significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of the joint
operating activity depends on the facts and circumstances specific to the
arrangement, including, but not limited to, the terms and conditions of the
arrangement.
15-11 The terms and conditions of the arrangement might indicate that
participants are not exposed to significant risks and rewards if, for example:
a. Services are performed in exchange for fees paid at market rates.
b. A participant is able to exit the arrangement without cause and recover all
   (or a significant portion) of its cumulative economic participation to date.
c. Initial profits are allocated to only one participant.
d. There is a limit on the reward that accrues to a participant.
15-12 Other factors that shall be considered in evaluating risks and rewards
include:
a. The stage of the endeavor's life cycle
b. The expected duration or extent of the participants' financial participation in
   the arrangement in relation to the endeavor's total expected life or total
   expected value.
15-13 Many collaborative arrangements involve licenses of intellectual
property, and the participants may exchange consideration related to the
license at the inception of the arrangement. Such an exchange does not
necessarily indicate that the participants are not exposed to significant risks
and rewards dependent on the ultimate commercial success of the endeavor.
An entity shall use judgment in determining whether its participation in an
arrangement subjects it to significant risks and rewards.


Interpretive response: Software entities frequently enter into arrangements
that are described as ‘collaborative arrangements’. Topic 606 excludes from its
scope contracts with a collaborator or a partner that is not a customer, but
rather, instead, has contracted with the entity to share in the risks and benefits
that result from the collaborative activity or process rather than to obtain an
output of the entity’s ordinary activities. If an entity’s activities in a collaborative
arrangement are not within the scope of Topic 606, the entity should apply the
guidance in Topic 808. That guidance does not address the recognition and
measurement of collaborative arrangements. However, the guidance on
presentation refers entities to other authoritative literature or, if there is no
appropriate analogy, states that they apply a reasonable, rational and
consistently applied accounting policy election.
Therefore, it will be important for a software entity to determine whether:
— an arrangement is a ‘collaborative arrangement’; and
— a collaborator or a partner is a ‘customer’ for any portion of the
  arrangement.
Even if the arrangement is a ‘collaborative arrangement’, if the collaborator is a
customer for some or all of the contract, the entity’s activities related to
transferring goods or services that are an output of its ordinary activities are
revenue-generating and within the scope of Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 30
                                                                                                       A. Scope


The guidance in Topic 808 defines a collaborative arrangement, while Topic 606
defines a ‘customer’.


     Has the party contracted with the entity to obtain
    goods or services that are an output of the entity’s
    ordinary activities in exchange for consideration?


                   Yes                                                        No




         Customer                                               Not a customer



  Note:        Ordinary activities are considered an entity’s
                 ongoing major or central operations


Whether an arrangement is a collaboration and whether a party in a
collaborative arrangement meets the definition of a customer is judgmental and
will depend on the facts and circumstances of the arrangement.
The Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC54) provides examples of
arrangements for which the facts and circumstances will affect whether the
arrangements are collaborations, but does not conclude as to whether they are
or are not):
— collaborative research and development efforts between biotechnology and
  pharmaceutical entities or similar arrangements in the aerospace and
  defense, technology, and healthcare industries, or in higher education;
— arrangements in the oil and gas industry in which partners in an offshore oil
  and gas field may make payments to each other to settle any differences
  between their proportionate entitlements to production volumes from the
  field during a reporting period; and
— arrangements in the not-for-profit industry in which an entity receives
  grants and sponsorship for research activity and the grantor or sponsor may
  specify how any output from the research activity will be used.
For those collaboration arrangements or aspects of the arrangement that are in
the scope of Topic 808 but are not in the scope of Topic 606, an entity may (but
is not required to) analogize to the recognition and measurement guidance in
Topic 606 for some or all of the collaboration. If an entity analogizes to Topic
606, it should not present the related revenue together with revenues from
contracts with customers that are directly in scope of Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 31
                                                                                                       A. Scope



                   Example A20.1
                   Collaborative arrangement that is within the scope
                   of Topic 606 for one party but not the other party
A software entity and an equipment manufacturer enter into an arrangement to
jointly develop software to power a new class of consumer product that the
equipment manufacturer will then produce and sell to customers. The entities
will both actively participate in the development of the software (e.g. both
participate in a joint development committee that is responsible for outlining
required specifications for the software and in testing the software in various
prototypes of the new consumer product) and will jointly share in the research
and development costs of the new software, and, if successful, share in the
profits from sales of the new consumer product that uses the software. The
software entity will own the IP, and have the right to license it to other
customers for applications that do not compete with the equipment
manufacturer’s product, while the equipment manufacturer will obtain a
perpetual license to the IP.
Based on these facts and circumstances, both entities conclude that the
arrangement is a ‘collaborative arrangement’. However, the two entities reach
different conclusions about whether the arrangement is in the scope of
Topic 606.
— The software entity’s ordinary activities include developing and licensing
  software; and therefore, the equipment manufacturer, in contracting to
  obtain a perpetual license to the software entity’s software, is contracting
  to obtain an output of the software entity’s ordinary activities. Thus, the
  equipment manufacturer is a customer and the software development and
  licensing aspects of this contract are within the scope of Topic 606 for the
  software entity. Software entities receiving funding in these types of
  arrangements should analyze the guidance related to funded software
  development arrangements as discussed in Question A30.
— The equipment manufacturer will participate in the development of
  software that the software entity will own at the conclusion of the
  collaboration. The equipment manufacturer does not, as part of its ordinary
  activities, engage in software development or sell software (or other IP) to
  other parties. Consequently, the equipment manufacturer concludes that its
  services, as part of the collaboration, to assist the software entity in
  developing the software are not within the scope of Topic 606. It should be
  noted, however, that once the product is developed, the equipment
  manufacturer’s sales of equipment will be within the scope of Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 32
                                                                                                       A. Scope



                   Question A30
                   Are funded software development arrangements
                   within the scope of Topic 606?


                  Excerpt from ASC 730-20

> Overall Guidance
15-1A This Subtopic also applies to software-development arrangements that
are fully or partially funded by a party other than the vendor that is developing
the software and for which technological feasibility of the computer software
product in accordance with the provisions of Subtopic 985-20 on software has
not been established before entering into the arrangement. Those
arrangements typically provide the funding party with some or all of the
following benefits:
a. Royalties payable to the funding party based solely on future sales of the
   product by the software vendor (that is, reverse royalties)
b. Discounts on future purchases by the funding party of products produced
   under the arrangement
c. A nonexclusive sublicense to the funding party, at no additional charge, for
   the use of any product developed (a prepaid or paid-up nonexclusive
   sublicense).



                  Excerpt from ASC 985-20

> Funded Software-Development Arrangements
25-12 A funded software-development arrangement within the scope of
Subtopic 730-20 shall be accounted for in conformity with that Subtopic. If the
technological feasibility of the computer software product pursuant to the
provisions of this Subtopic has been established before the arrangement has
been entered into, Subtopic 730-20 does not apply because the arrangement is
not a research and development arrangement. If capitalization of the software-
development costs commences pursuant to this Subtopic and the funding
party is a collaborator or a partner, any income from the funding party under a
funded software-development arrangement shall be credited first to the
amount of the development costs capitalized. If the income from the funding
party exceeds the amount of development costs capitalized, the excess shall
be deferred and credited against future amounts that subsequently qualify for
capitalization. Any deferred amount remaining after the project is completed
(that is, when the software is available for general release to customers and
capitalization has ceased) shall be credited to income. If the counterparty is a
customer, the entity shall apply the guidance of Topic 606 on revenue from
contracts with customers.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 33
                                                                                                       A. Scope


> Software
60-3 For software-development arrangements that are fully or partially funded
by a party other than the vendor that is developing the software and for which
technological feasibility of the computer software product has not been
established before entering into the arrangement, see Subtopic 730-20 on
research and development arrangements.


Interpretive response: It depends. The entity would have to consider both: (1)
whether the arrangement should be accounted under Subtopic 730-20,
Research and Development—Research and Development Arrangements
(Subtopic 730-20) and (2) whether the funding party meets the definition of a
customer. If technological feasibility (see paragraphs 985-20-25-2 and 985-20-
55-4 through 55-9) of the related software product has not been established
before commencement of a funded software-development arrangement, the
guidance in Subtopic 730-20 should be evaluated. Subtopic 730-20 would not
apply if technological feasibility is achieved before entering into the
arrangement because the arrangement is not a research and development
arrangement (see paragraph 985-20-25-12). In addition, Subtopic 730-20 would
not apply where the entity does not have the right to retain or acquire the
results of the funded software-development arrangement.
Under Subtopic 730-20, all or portions of the funding proceeds are considered
to be either: (1) a liability to the funding party or (2) an agreement to provide
services. The determination is dependent on whether the entity has an
obligation (either implied or stated) to repay the funding regardless of the
outcome of the research and development activities. If a funded software
development arrangement is determined to be a service arrangement (i.e. the
entity's obligation is to perform research and development services, rather than
a debt obligation to the funding party), regardless of whether based on the
guidance in Subtopic 730-20 (i.e. where the arrangement is not in the scope of
Subtopic 730-20 for either reason outlined above), then Topic 606 would apply if
the funding party meets the definition of a ‘customer’.
Topic 606 does not apply to contracts with parties to a contract that are not
customers such as partners or some collaborators with the entity in developing
goods or services (see Question A20). Whether the funding party meets the
definition of a customer is judgmental and will likely depend on the facts and
circumstances of the funded software development arrangement. Consider the
following two scenarios.

      Scenario 1
      Software Entity X receives funding from a third party (funding party) to
      develop a software application to map out the locations of oil and natural
      gas deposits. The third party will obtain a nonexclusive, perpetual license to
      the software and intends to embed that software as a module into its
      enterprise resource planning (ERP) software for sale to oil and gas
      producing entities. In addition to the research funding that it does not have
      to repay, Software Entity X will also receive future royalties on the third
      party’s sales of its ERP software that includes Software Entity X’s module.
      Since Entity X is in the business of developing and licensing software to
      third parties, Entity X concludes in this scenario it is contracting to provide
      software and services that are an output of its ‘ordinary activities’; and



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 34
                                                                                                       A. Scope


      therefore, the funding party is a customer. This funded software
      development arrangement should be accounted for by Software Entity X in
      accordance with Topic 606, which will include reporting any funding
      received ahead of the entity’s performance in fulfilling its performance
      obligation(s) in the contract as a contract liability. We believe this would be
      the appropriate conclusion even if Software Entity X doesn’t normally
      develop mapping software or develop software for oil and gas entities. We
      believe ‘ordinary activities’ would apply to the broader consideration that
      Software Entity X is in business as a software developer that licenses
      software to third parties.

      Scenario 2
      Equipment Entity Y receives funding from a third party to develop a
      software application to be used in semiconductor research. Equipment
      Entity Y does not have to repay the funding if it puts forth ‘best efforts’ in
      the research and development. Equipment Entity Y will own the developed
      software, while the funding party will receive a perpetual license to that
      software. Both parties intend to use the developed software to increase
      their research efficiency. Equipment Entity Y is not a software developer,
      nor has it licensed software to customers previously; however, both parties
      have agreed that, subject to their joint approval, they would license this
      software to another party if it would not negatively affect their application of
      the software. In such case, they would split any license fees earned on a
      50/50 basis.
      The funding party is determined to be a collaboration partner, rather than a
      customer, in this fact pattern because Equipment Entity Y’s ordinary
      activities do not include the development and licensing of software. We
      believe this would be the appropriate conclusion even if Equipment Entity Y
      had entered into a similar transaction in the past; engaging in an activity on
      more than one occasion would not in and of itself create a presumption that
      an activity is ‘ordinary’ for that entity. We believe a pattern of such
      transactions could call into question whether the funding party is a
      customer even if Equipment Entity Y’s ‘primary’ activities were
      semiconductor research and development and licensing the results of
      those efforts.
As discussed in Question A20, in circumstances where the funding party is
determined to be a partner in a ‘collaborative arrangement’, Topic 808 provides
income statement presentation guidance for collaborative arrangements.
However, because Topic 808 does not provide recognition and measurement
guidance for collaborative arrangements, the entity will have to apply a
reasonable, rational and consistent accounting policy for such arrangements.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 35
                                                                                                       A. Scope


Decision tree for analyzing software development arrangements funded or
partially funded by others


                                                   Is arrangement funded                         Arrangement is not
                                                    partially or entirely by                      a funded software
                                                                                       No
                                                            others?                           development arrangement.


                                                                  Yes


                                                Does entity retain results of                  — Account for
                                                arrangement or does it have                      arrangement under
                                                an option to acquire results           No        Topic 606 as one to
                                                     of arrangement?                             transfer software and/
                                                                                                 or provide software
                                                                                                 development services.
                                                                                               — Account for software
                                                                                                 development costs
                                                                                                 per Subtopic 985-20,
                                                                  Yes                            unless they relate to a
                                                                                                 contract to deliver
                                                                                                 software/software
                                                                                                 system.



                                                Has technological feasibility
                                                  been established before                                    See
                                                 arrangement was entered                    No              Part B
                                                           into?

                                                                  Yes



 Proceeds from funding                                  Is contract with
 party are:                             No                a customer?
 — offset first against
     Subtopic 985-20
     capitalized costs, and
                                                                  Yes
     second against excess
     deferred and
     capitalizable costs;
                                                Recognize revenue based
     and
                                                on guidance in Topic 606.
 — any remaining
                                                Account for software
     deferred amount is
                                                development costs per
     credited to income
                                                Subtopic 985-20, unless
     upon completion of
                                                they are accounted for as
     project.
                                                contract costs per
      [985-20-25-12]
                                                Subtopic 340-40.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 36
                                                                                                       A. Scope



                       From
                       Part A




                                                                            — Account for arrangement as
                                                                              contract to transfer a software
      Evaluate accounting for proceeds
                                                                              license and/or provide software
    received under funding arrangement
                                                                              development services.
   based on guidance in Subtopic 730-20:
                                                                            — Recognize revenue based on the
    Does entity have implied or stated
                                                               No             guidance in Topic 606.
  obligation to repay all or a portion of
                                                                            — Account for software development
  the funding regardless of outcome of
                                                                              costs per Subtopic 985-20, unless
               arrangement?
                                                                              they relate to a contract to deliver
                                                                              software/software system


                            Yes


                                                                             Note: If entity does not automatically
 — Record funding proceeds with                                              retain results of software development
   stated or implied repayment                                               arrangement, but subsequently
   obligation as liability to funding                                        exercises an option to purchase results
   party.                                                                    of arrangement from funding party, the
 — Account for funding proceeds not                                          nature of those results and their future
   subject to repayment as payment                                           use determines the accounting for the
   for software license and/or                                               purchase. Consider the guidance in
   software development services.                                            paras 985-20-55-13 – 55-14.
 — Recognize payments in
   accordance with Topic 606 (if
   counterparty is customer) or other
   US GAAP (e.g. Topic 808 if the
   counterparty is collaborator or
   partner).
 — Account for software development
   costs per Subtopic 985-20, unless
   they relate to a contract to deliver
   software/software system



Is the arrangement funded partially or entirely by others?
If a software entity receives funds from a third party to be used in performing
software-development activities, the nature and terms of the arrangement
should be analyzed to determine the appropriate accounting for the
arrangement. If the arrangement is funded entirely by the software entity, it is
not subject to the guidance in this section (i.e. it is not a funded software-
developed arrangement).
Does the software entity retain the results of the arrangement or does it
have an option to acquire those results?
If the software entity does not retain or have the right to acquire the results of
the funded software-development arrangement and the financial risk associated
with the arrangement rests solely with the funding parties, the arrangement
would be treated as a contract to perform software-development services.
If the software entity retains, or has the right to acquire, the results of the
funded software-development arrangement, depending on whether
technological feasibility had been established before the arrangement was
entered into, either the guidance in Subtopic 730-20 or paragraph 985-20-25-12



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 37
                                                                                                       A. Scope


would apply to the arrangement. Subtopic 730-20 provides guidance for
determining if the entity (1) has an obligation to repay the funding parties or (2)
has an income-producing contract to transfer a software license and/or perform
research and development services for others.



                   Example A30.1
                   Not a funded software development arrangement
ABC Corp., a systems integrator, entered into an arrangement to customize
Customer’s software based on certain entity-specific functionality requirements.
The customized software developed by ABC under this arrangement is the
property of Customer, and ABC does not have any rights to obtain the software
that is developed as part of this engagement.
ABC does not have the right to acquire the results of the software-development
arrangement, and the financial risk associated with the arrangement rests solely
with the funding parties, so the arrangement should be accounted for as a
contract to perform software-development services (i.e. it is not a funded
software-development arrangement).



                   Example A30.2
                   Funded software development arrangement (1)
ABC Corp. entered into an arrangement to develop a new networking software
application for Customer. The software developed by ABC under this
arrangement is the property of ABC and can be marketed to other customers of
ABC in the future.
ABC is entitled to the results of the software-development arrangement, so the
arrangement should be accounted for as a funded software-development
arrangement pursuant to the guidance in Subtopic 730-20 or paragraph 985-20-
25-12, depending on whether technological feasibility of the software had been
established at inception of the arrangement.



                   Example A30.3
                   Funded software development arrangement (2)
ABC Corp. entered into an arrangement to develop a new data mining software
application for Customer. The software developed by ABC under this
arrangement is the property of ABC and can be marketed to other customers of
ABC in the future. Customer will receive a royalty equal to 3% of all future sales
of the software product developed by ABC under this arrangement.
ABC is entitled to retain the results of the software-development arrangement
in exchange for future royalties to Customer, so the arrangement should be
accounted for as a funded software-development arrangement pursuant to the
guidance in Subtopic 730-20 or paragraph 985-20-25-12, depending on whether
technological feasibility had been established at inception of the arrangement.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 38
                                                                                                       A. Scope


Has technological feasibility been established before the
arrangement was entered into?
If technological feasibility, as defined in Subtopic 985-20, Software – Costs of
Software to be Sold, Leased, or Marketed, has been established before the
arrangement is entered into, Subtopic 730-20 does not apply because the
arrangement is not a research and development arrangement. In that situation,
paragraph 985-20-25-12 would apply and the accounting model would be based
on whether the contract is with a customer as discussed further below. If the
contract is with a customer, Topic 606 would govern the accounting for the
arrangement.
If technological feasibility has not been established before a funded software-
development arrangement is entered into, Subtopic 730-20 applies to the
arrangement.

Is the contract with a customer?
Topic 606 does not apply to contracts with parties to a contract that are not
customers, such as partners or collaborators with the entity in developing
goods or services to be sold to customers that are not, themselves, customers
(see Question A20).
If the contract is not with a customer, paragraph 985-20-25-12 requires that the
proceeds from the funding parties first be offset against any costs capitalized
for the related software pursuant to Subtopic 985-20. To the extent that the
proceeds from the funding parties exceed the software-development costs
capitalized, the excess would be deferred and credited against future
capitalizable costs. Any remaining deferred amount would be credited to
income upon completion of the development activities (i.e. when the software
is available for general release to customers).
If the contract is with a customer, paragraph 985-20-25-12 states that the entity
should apply the guidance of Topic 606 on revenue from contracts with
customers. Software development costs should be accounted for in accordance
with Subtopic 985-20, unless such costs are accounted for as contract costs
under Topic 606.

Is the software entity obligated to repay all or a portion of the
funding?
If a software entity enters into a funded software-development arrangement
subject to the provisions of Subtopic 730-20 (i.e. because technological
feasibility of the software was not established at inception of the arrangement),
that arrangement is accounted for as either (1) a liability to the funding party or
(2) an arrangement to transfer software (or a software license) or provide
software-development services. If the enterprise may be obligated to repay any
amounts to the funding party regardless of the outcome of the software-
development arrangement, the software entity should estimate and recognize
that liability as a debt obligation. This requirement applies regardless of whether
the software entity can settle its obligation by paying cash, issuing securities or
by other means (e.g. transferring other assets).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 39
                                                                                                       A. Scope


The following are examples of funded software-development arrangements that
contain an obligation to repay amounts to the funding party regardless of the
outcome of the software development.
— The software entity guarantees repayment of the funds, regardless of the
  outcome of the software development.
— The funding party can require the software entity to purchase its interest in
  the software development, regardless of the outcome.
— The funding party is entitled to receive debt or equity securities of the
  software entity upon completion of the software development, regardless
  of the outcome.
In some cases, conditions related to the arrangement may indicate that the
software entity does not transfer the financial risk of the research and
development, even though the funded software-development agreement does
not explicitly require repayment of funded amounts. If those conditions suggest
that it is probable that the software entity will repay any of the funds regardless
of the outcome of the software development, there is a presumption that the
enterprise has an obligation to repay the funding party. This presumption can be
overcome only by substantial evidence to the contrary. Conditions leading to
the presumption that the software entity may be obligated to repay the funding
party include the following.
— The software entity has indicated its intent to repay all or a portion of the
  funding regardless of the outcome of the software-development activities.
— The software entity would incur a severe economic penalty if it did not
  repay all or a portion of the funding regardless of the outcome of the
  software-development activities.
— A significant related party relationship exists between the software entity
  and the funding party.
— The software entity has essentially completed the entire development
  effort before entering into the arrangement.
As indicated in the preceding paragraph, the existence of a significant related
party relationship between the enterprise and the parties funding the research
and development creates a presumption that the enterprise will repay the funds
provided by other parties under a research and development arrangement.
Paragraph 730-20-S99-1 clarifies the SEC’s view that a significant related party
relationship exists for purposes of applying the guidance in Subtopic 730-20
when related parties of the entity receiving the funds own 10% or more of the
entity providing the funds. Paragraph 730-20-S99-1 also specifies that the
presumption that funding will be repaid cannot be overcome by evidence that
the entity receiving the funds does not have the resources to repay those
amounts based on its current and expected future financial condition.
Additionally, the SEC has taken the position that funds received in research and
development arrangements from a related party should be accounted for as a
liability (i.e. the presumption of repayment cannot be overcome) if:
— the registrant is required to make royalty payments to the related funding
  party based on its revenues as a whole and not just on the revenues
  stemming from the products developed with funds provided by the funding
  party; or




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 40
                                                                                                       A. Scope


— the registrant has an option, other than a fair value purchase option, to
  acquire the results of the research and development arrangement.
A software entity that incurs a liability to repay funding parties in connection
with a development arrangement should account for the related software-
development costs in accordance with Subtopic 985-20 (i.e. in the same
manner as software development costs incurred absent the funding
arrangement). If the aggregate proceeds to be received under a funded-
development arrangement will exceed the liability for the software entity’s
repayment obligation to the funding party, paragraph 730-20-25-7 requires that
the entity recognize its portion of the research and development expense in the
same manner as the liability to the funding party is incurred (e.g. as the initial
funds are expended or on a pro rata basis). If technological feasibility of the
software is established subsequent to the inception of the funding
arrangement, we believe the guidance in Subtopic 730-20 and Subtopic 985-20
should continue to be applied, rather than the guidance in paragraph 985-20-
25-12.

Income recognition under arrangements involving funded
software development
If technological feasibility has not been established before a funded software-
development arrangement is entered into and the software entity cannot be
obligated to repay any amounts to the funding party regardless of the outcome
of the research arrangement (i.e. any repayment provisions depend solely on
the results of the research and development having a future economic benefit),
the entity should account for the arrangement as an obligation to transfer
software (or a software license) and/or perform software-development services.
As such, the arrangement consideration should be recognized in income based
on the provisions of Topic 606 (if the counterparty is a customer) or Topic 610 (if
the entity will be transferring a nonfinancial asset – i.e. the software or a license
to the software – to a non-customer), in the same manner as arrangements that
do not involve the receipt of proceeds from a customer before completion of
the related product development.
If technological feasibility has not been established before a funded software-
development arrangement is entered into and the aggregate proceeds to be
received under the funded-development arrangement will exceed the software
entity’s liability to the funding party (e.g. the software entity guarantees
repayment of only a portion of the funding regardless of the outcome of the
research and development), the excess proceeds should be accounted for in
the same manner as the arrangement consideration in the preceding paragraph.

Income statement presentation for funds credited to income
under a funded software-development arrangements
It is necessary to consider all relevant factors when determining the appropriate
income statement presentation for funding amounts that are recognized as
income. Funding amounts recognized as income should be presented as
revenue in the software entity’s financial statements if the counterparty is a
‘customer’. However, in other situations, funding amounts recognized as
income should be presented as other operating income if the entity concludes
the arrangement is for the sale of a nonfinancial asset to non-customers or as a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 41
                                                                                                       A. Scope


reduction of research and development expense (e.g. in certain collaboration
scenarios).



                   Example A30.4
                   Income-producing arrangement under
                   Subtopic 730-20 (1)
ABC Corp. is developing a new human resources software application
(Product X). Before development was complete, ABC entered into a perpetual
license agreement with Customer to license software Product X for $1,000,000,
due at inception of the arrangement. Product X will be delivered to Customer
upon its general release. Additionally, Customer will receive a royalty equal to
3% of all future sales of Product X by ABC. In addition:
— ABC cannot be obligated to repay any amounts to Customer other than the
  3% royalty regardless of the outcome of the research arrangement (i.e. the
  future royalty payments depend solely on the results of the research and
  development having a future economic benefit).
— ABC retains the results of the development arrangement (Product X) and
  technological feasibility of Product X has not been established.
— Product X is currently in development and it will be made available for
  general release concurrently with its delivery to Customer.
Because ABC retains the results of the development arrangement and
technological feasibility has not been established, Subtopic 730-20 should be
applied. Further, because ABC cannot be obligated to repay any amounts to
Customer regardless of the outcome of the research and development, ABC
should account for the arrangement as a contract to transfer a license to
Product X, when available, in accordance with Topic 606. ABC should account
for the software-development costs in accordance with Subtopic 985-20,
Software – Costs of Software to be Sold, Leased, or Marketed (i.e. in the same
manner as software-development costs incurred absent the funding
arrangement).



                   Example A30.5
                   Income-producing arrangement under
                   Subtopic 730-20 (2)
ABC Corp.’s current product roadmap (development plan) documents ABC’s
intent to develop additional features and functionality for a future version of its
existing data storage software (Product X); however, development of such
features has not yet commenced. ABC enters into an arrangement with
Customer to license its existing software Product X on a perpetual basis and to
perform significant customization services to develop additional features and
functionality, including certain of the features included in ABC’s current
development plan, as well as additional features specifically desired by
Customer. The arrangement consideration is $1,000,000, due at inception. ABC
retains the intellectual property (or IP) – i.e. the software – resulting from the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 42
                                                                                                       A. Scope


arrangement with Customer; however, Customer will receive a royalty equal to
3% of all future sales of subsequent versions of Product X that contain features
and functionality developed under this arrangement. At inception of the
arrangement with Customer, technological feasibility had not been established
for either the customized software to be delivered under this arrangement or
for the next version of Product X. ABC cannot be obligated to repay any
amounts to Customer.
ABC believes the development work performed under the arrangement with
Customer will expedite development of the next version of Product X
containing the features and functionality identified in ABC’s current
development plan. However, certain of the customized features to be
developed under this arrangement are unique to Customer and will not be
incorporated in a future version of Product X. ABC believes that the next version
of Product X containing certain of the features and functionality to be developed
under the arrangement with Customer, as well as additional features identified
in ABC’s development plan, will be available for general release within
six months after completion of the arrangement with Customer. Absent the
arrangement with Customer, ABC believes it would have taken several months
longer to release the next version of Product X.
ABC (1) retains the IP resulting from the arrangement with Customer, (2)
technological feasibility of the customized software has not been established
before the arrangement was entered into, and (3) the software entity cannot be
obligated to repay any amounts to the funding party regardless of the outcome
of the research arrangement (i.e. the future royalty payments depend solely on
the results of the research and development having a future economic benefit).
Therefore, the entity should account for the arrangement as an obligation to
transfer a software license and perform software-development services.
Although this arrangement encompasses development of features that are in
ABC’s development plan, it also includes development of features that are not
in ABC’s development plan, the next version of Product X is not expected to be
released until six months after completion of the arrangement with Customer,
and the next version of Product X will contain features and functionality that are
not being developed in connection with this arrangement.
Because the counterparty in this contract is a customer, the consideration of
$1,000,000 paid to ABC by Customer should be recognized as revenue based
on the guidance in Topic 606. The software development costs should be
accounted for as costs to fulfill the contract with Customer as enumerated in
paragraph 985-20-15-3.
Royalties payable to Customer under this arrangement should be recognized as
incurred (i.e. when Product X is licensed to third parties).



                   Example A30.6
                   Entity can be required to repay funding
ABC Corp. is developing a new human resources software application
(Product X). Before development was complete, ABC entered into a perpetual
license arrangement with Customer to license software Product X for
$1,000,000, due at inception of the arrangement. Product X will be delivered to
Customer upon its general release. Additionally, Customer will receive a royalty



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 43
                                                                                                       A. Scope


equal to 3% of future sales of Product X by ABC for a three-year period.
Technological feasibility of Product X has not been established as of the
inception of the arrangement. If ABC has not paid at least $1,000,000 in
royalties to Customer after three years, ABC must pay Customer the difference
between $1,000,000 and the actual royalties that were paid during the
three-year period.
ABC retains the results of the research and development arrangement
(Product X) and technological feasibility has not been established, so
Subtopic 730-20 should be applied. ABC can be obligated to repay amounts to
Customer up to $1,000,000 regardless of the outcome of the research
arrangement (i.e. Customer is guaranteed at least $1,000,000). As such, ABC
should account for the funding proceeds as a liability to the funding party. That
liability should be reduced in future periods as royalty payments are made. ABC
should account for software-development costs in accordance with
Subtopic 985-20 (i.e. in the same manner as software-development costs
incurred absent the funding arrangement).



                   Example A30.7
                   Technological feasibility established before contract
                   inception
ABC Corp. is developing a new inventory-management software application
(Product A). Technological feasibility has been established for Product A, and
$50,000 of software-development costs have been capitalized pursuant to
Subtopic 985-20. On November 15, 20X5, Product A is expected to be made
available for general release to customers, at which time capitalization of
development costs will cease. On October 15, 20X5, ABC entered into an
arrangement with XYZ (who is not a customer) to license Product A for
$200,000 due at inception of the contract. As consideration for entering into the
license before development is complete, Entity is entitled to a royalty equal to
3% of all future sales of Product A by ABC, up to a maximum of $200,000. ABC
cannot be obligated to pay any amounts to Entity other than the 3% royalty.
ABC retains the results of the research and development arrangement
(Product A) and technological feasibility has been established, so paragraph 985-
20-25-12 should be applied. ABC should apply $50,000 of the arrangement fee to
reduce the existing capitalized development costs for Product A to zero and
should record the remaining $150,000 of the fee as a deferred credit. That
deferred credit should be applied as a reduction of future Product A development
costs that qualify for capitalization under Subtopic 985-20. Any remaining credit at
completion of Product A development (i.e. upon general release of the software)
should be recorded in income at that time. Therefore, if ABC incurred an
additional $40,000 of development costs on Product A before general release,
$40,000 of the deferred credit would be offset against those capitalizable costs
and $110,000 would be credited to income upon general release of Product A.
Royalties payable to Customer under this arrangement should be recognized as
incurred (i.e. when Product A is licensed to third parties).
Alternatively, if ABC had a similar arrangement with a customer, ABC would
account for the arrangement in accordance with the guidance in Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 44
                                                                                                       A. Scope


Accounting for the acquisition of results of funded software-
development arrangements
If the software entity does not automatically retain the results of the
arrangement (i.e. the intellectual property developed), but subsequently
exercises an option to purchase the results of the software development from
the funding party, the nature of those results and their future use should
determine the accounting for the purchase transaction. When making that
determination, we believe the guidance on accounting for purchased software
in paragraphs 985-20-55-13 and 55-14 should be considered.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Subtopic 730-20 and the provisions of Subtopic 985-20 with respect to
determining whether software was technologically feasible were not changed.
As a result, the determination of whether a funded software development
arrangement is in the scope of Subtopic 730-20 has not changed, nor has the
accounting for such arrangements that represent a liability to a funding party.
Funded software development arrangements that are considered ‘income-
producing’ arrangements (i.e. those to transfer software licenses and/or provide
software development services) are accounted for differently subsequent to the
adoption of Topic 606 because the standard superseded the legacy US GAAP
guidance previously applicable to those arrangements (principally,
Subtopics 985-605 and 605-35).
Funded software development arrangements that are collaborations are still
subject, as they were under legacy US GAAP, to the provisions in Topic 808.
Topic 808 does not provide recognition or measurement guidance for those
arrangements; therefore, entities are likely to continue to account for such
arrangements in their historical manner.



                   Question A40
                   Are nonmonetary exchanges of software within the
                   scope of Topic 606?
Interpretive response: It depends. Many software entities enter into barter
transactions to exchange the right to use their software product for rights to
use another entity’s software product or other nonmonetary goods (e.g.
hardware). These transactions vary, but examples include:
— exchanges of a license to the entity’s software for a license to another
  entity’s software that will then be sold to customers (either resold on its
  own or as part of larger arrangement);
— exchanges of a license to the entity’s software to a customer for a license
  to the customer’s software, which the software entity is permitted to
  sublicense to other customers as a component of the software entity’s
  products;




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 45
                                                                                                       A. Scope


— exchanges of a license to the entity’s software for a license to a customer’s
  software that the software entity plans to use for internal purposes; and
— exchanges of a license to the entity’s software that is not an output of its
  ordinary business activities in exchange for a license to another entity’s (i.e.
  a non-customer’s) software/technology that the entity plans to use for
  internal purposes.
This question does not address situations in which a customer exchanges one
entity software license for another one. This is discussed in Chapter C – Step 2:
Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
The following diagram illustrates which guidance is applicable to nonmonetary
exchanges of software, and discussion follows the diagram.

     Nonmonetary exchange between entities in
                                                                       Account for arrangement under Subtopic
    same line of business to facilitate sales to
                                                 Yes                      845-10 (record at historical cost)
       customers or potential customers?

                                  No


                                                                            Account for arrangement under
               Contract with a customer?                                Topic 606 – software/software license(s)
                                                                Yes       received is noncash consideration.

                                  No


    Account for arrangement according to other
     applicable GAAP or if no other applicable
       GAAP by analogy to Subtopic 610-20


 Paragraph 606-10-15-2(e) states that nonmonetary exchanges between entities
in the same line of business to facilitate sales to customers, or to potential
customers, other than the parties to the exchange, which would include such
exchanges of software, are outside the scope of Topic 606. A software license
for software license exchange should be reviewed carefully; the facts and
circumstances of each nonmonetary transaction should be considered on a
case-by-case basis in determining whether the exchange is of the nature
described in paragraph 606-10-15-2(e).
If a software exchange transaction is not between entities in the same line of
business to facilitate sales to customers, or to potential customers, other than
the parties to the exchange, the accounting for that transaction depends on
whether the counterparty to the exchange is a customer. This includes
exchange transactions for software for internal use. A software exchange with
a customer is accounted for as a contract with a customer involving noncash
consideration and is within the scope of Topic 606. A software exchange with
an entity that is not a customer is generally accounted for as the sale of a
nonfinancial asset (whether the sale of the software or sale of a license to the
software) in exchange for noncash consideration by analogy to Subtopic 610-20,
Other Income – Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial
Assets, which applies the contract identification, transaction price
measurement and recognition guidance in Topic 606. For a software exchange
to meet the contract identification criteria in Topic 606, it must have commercial
substance (see Chapter B – Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer). A
contract without commercial substance would not meet the criterion in




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 46
                                                                                                       A. Scope


paragraph 606-10-25-1(d), which states that the contract must have ’commercial
substance’ (that is, the risk, timing, or amount of the entity’s future cash flows
is expected to change as a result of the contract).




                  Excerpt from ASC 845-10

> Transactions
15-4 The guidance in the Nonmonetary Transactions Topic does not apply to
the following transactions: …
k.     The transfer of a nonfinancial asset within the scope of Subtopic 610-20 in
       exchange for noncash consideration (see paragraphs 610-20-32-2 through
       32-3, which require measurement consistent with paragraphs 606-10-32-21
       through 32-24).


For software exchanges accounted for in accordance with either Topic 606 or
Subtopic 610-20, which applies the same transaction price guidance as
Topic 606 (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price), the
transaction price is measured based on the fair value, at contract inception, of
the noncash consideration (i.e. the software or software license) to be received.
If the fair value of the noncash consideration to be received cannot be
reasonably estimated by the entity, the entity looks to the stand-alone selling
price of the goods or services (i.e. the software or software license) that will be
transferred to the other party.



                   Example A40.1
                   Nonmonetary exchanges of software
Software Entity XYZ licenses software Product A (a suite of financial accounting
applications) to customers in the normal course of business. Product A includes
software (Product B) licensed by XYZ from Company PQR (i.e. Product B is
PQR’s software).
XYZ agrees to exchange a license to Product A with PQR for licenses to
Product B. XYZ intends to re-license Product B (as a stand-alone product or
embedded in Product A) to its customers. PQR intends to use Product A for
internal use. The fair value of a license to Product A is reasonably estimable.
XYZ is a customer of PQR (XYZ’s Product A includes PQR’s Product B that is an
output of PQR’s ordinary activities) and vice versa (PQR is licensing XYZ’s
Product A that is an output of its ordinary activities).
However, from XYZ’s perspective, the transaction is not in the scope of
Topic 606 because the arrangement is a nonmonetary exchange between
entities in the same line of business to facilitate sales to XYZ’s customers
(Product B is used in Product A).
From PQR’s perspective, the arrangement is within the scope of Topic 606
because PQR is receiving a license to Product A in exchange for licenses to



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 47
                                                                                                       A. Scope


Product B that are an output of PQR’s ordinary activities (i.e. the arrangement is
a contract with a customer).
Accounting by Software Entity XYZ
The exchange of a license to Product A for a license to Product B is an
exchange of a product held for sale in the ordinary course of business for a
product to be sold in the same line of business to facilitate sales to customers
other than the parties to the exchange. The exchange is, therefore, recorded at
carryover basis (which might be $0) under the guidance of Subtopic 845-10 –
i.e. no revenue is recognized until Product B is sublicensed to other customers
in a subsequent transaction (through XYZ licensing Product A that includes a
sublicense to Product B).
Accounting by Company PQR
As outlined above, the exchange of licenses to Product B for a license to
Product A by Company PQR is a transaction with a customer within the scope
of Topic 606. The exchange is, therefore, accounted for by Company PQR
under the Topic 606 guidance for noncash consideration. Therefore, PQR
measures the noncash consideration – the license to Product A – at fair value
and revenue is recognized by PQR when it transfers control of the license to
Product B to XYZ.




                   Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Software or software licenses received by the software entity sold,
licensed or leased in the same line of business as the software entity’s
software or software licenses
Nonmonetary exchanges of software were specifically addressed in
Subtopic 985-845, Software – Non-monetary Transactions. Subtopic 985-845
specified that the software entity should record an exchange at carryover basis
when the technology/products received by the software entity in the exchange
would be sold, licensed or leased in the same line of business as the software
entity’s products that were delivered in the exchange. The amendments to
US GAAP resulting from ASU 2014-09 will generally not change the accounting
for exchanges of software between entities in the same line of business to
facilitate sales to customers, or to potential customers, other than the parties to
the exchange. In general, such exchanges will continue to be recorded at
carryover basis in accordance with Subtopic 845-10.
Other software exchanges
However, if the software or software license received by the software entity in
the exchange would not be sold, licensed or leased in the same line of business
as the software entity’s software or licenses that were delivered in the
exchange, the software entity would record the exchange at fair value,
provided that:
— the fair value of the software/software licenses exchanged or received
  could be determined within reasonable limits (for an exchange transaction
  involving software, entity-specific evidence of fair value (VSOE) for the
  deliverables given up or received was required to meet this criterion); and



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 48
                                                                                                       A. Scope


— the software/software licenses received in the exchange were expected, at the
  time of the exchange, to be used by the software entity and the value ascribed
  to the transaction reasonably reflected the expected use.
If either condition was not met, the exchange was recorded at carryover basis.
Under legacy US GAAP, the fair value of the software received or transferred
was established only through VSOE, which was typically not available.
Consequently, most software exchanges under legacy US GAAP were recorded
at carryover basis, rather than at fair value.
For nonmonetary exchanges not within the scope of Subtopic 845-10 (e.g. the
entity transfers a license to its software that is an output of its ordinary
activities in exchange for a license to the counterparty’s software that the entity
will use for internal purposes), the application of Topic 606 or Subtopic 610-20
to the exchange may result in substantially different accounting from legacy
US GAAP. Software exchanges within the scope of Topic 606 or accounted for
by analogy to Subtopic 610-20 will never be recorded at carryover basis; they
will be recorded based on the fair value of the software (or software licenses)
the entity receives in the exchange if that is reasonably estimable and, if not,
based on the stand-alone selling price of the software (or software licenses)
that will be transferred to the counterparty.
VSOE does not apply either to the determination of the fair value of the
software (or licenses) received nor to the stand-alone selling price of the
software (or licenses) to be transferred.



                   Question A50
                   What is the accounting for an exchange of software
                   licenses between entities in the same line of
                   business to facilitate sales to customers, or to
                   potential customers, other than the parties to the
                   exchange?
Interpretive response: Nonmonetary exchanges of software between entities
in the same line of business to facilitate sales to customers, or to potential
customers, other than the parties to the exchange will follow the general
nonmonetary exchanges guidance in Subtopic 845-10. In accordance with
Subtopic 845-10, a software entity should record an exchange at carryover basis
when the software licenses received by the software entity in the exchange will
be sold, licensed or leased in the same line of business as the software entity’s
software licenses that were delivered in the exchange (i.e. no revenue should
be recognized until the counterparty’s software is sublicensed to other
customers in a subsequent transaction).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 49
                                                                                                       A. Scope



                   Question A60
                   Can an entity record proceeds received from the
                   settlement of a patent infringement with another
                   party as revenue?
Interpretive response: We believe it depends on whether the proceeds
constitute revenue. Revenue is defined in Topic 606 and the ASC Master
Glossary as ‘Inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity or
settlements of its liabilities (or a combination of both) from delivering or
producing goods, rendering services, or other activities that constitute the
entity’s ongoing major or central operations’.
This approach to the evaluation is consistent with that taken under pre-Topic
606 legacy US GAAP, which, in the absence of a codified definition of revenue,
looked to the Conceptual Framework (CON 6) for determining classification of
the settlement amount. The Topic 606 and ASC Master Glossary definition of
‘revenue’ is unchanged from the legacy definition of revenue in CON 6.
Therefore, we believe in these scenarios that Topic 606 did not change: [606-10
Glossary, ASC Master Glossary]

— the analysis regarding the income statement classification of settlement
  proceeds; and
— that the classification depends on the relevant facts and circumstances.
The settlement of a patent infringement should be distinguished from a
settlement of past due license fees. If an entity is in the business of licensing
intellectual property (e.g. licensing software) and is required to pursue legal
action to enforce its licensing rights, whether from an existing customer (e.g. to
collect unpaid license fees – see Question F212) or from an entity that is not
party to an existing contract (e.g. an unrelated entity that has obtained
unauthorized use of the entity’s IP – see Question F216), the settlement
amount should be allocated between ‘past due license fees’ (which would be
recognized as revenue in accordance with Topic 606) and any settlement gain.
Generally, this would be based on the stand-alone selling price of the license
with amounts in excess of the stand-alone selling price of the license being
characterized as a settlement gain.
However, in other scenarios, one entity (Entity A) may infringe on another
entity’s (Entity B) patent that Entity B does not license to other parties as part of
its ongoing major or central operations. For example, Entity A may infringe upon
Entity B’s patent when it develops a similar consumer product to one previously
developed by Entity B. In those scenarios, because licensing is not part of the
entity’s (Entity B’s) ongoing major or central operations, the settlement
proceeds would generally not be characterized as license revenue.




                  Observation

We believe that the considerations outlined in an SEC staff speech (Eric C.
West) at the 2007 AICPA National Conference on Current SEC and PCAOB
Developments are still relevant in analyzing the substance of these
arrangements. That SEC staff speech discussed various matters including



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 50
                                                                                                       A. Scope


potential elements of the arrangement, allocation of consideration, classification
of the settlement (including treatment of payment to customers) and
consideration received by a customer as a result of a settlement. The SEC staff
noted that accounting for litigation settlements requires judgment in
determining the elements within the arrangement, when to recognize those
elements and the value to allocate to them.



                   Question A65
                   How should an entity evaluate whether using a
                   portfolio approach would materially differ from
                   applying Topic 606 on a contract-by-contract basis?
Interpretive response: Selecting the size and composition of a portfolio
requires judgment. An entity should take a reasonable approach to determine
the appropriate portfolios, but it does not necessarily need to quantitatively
assess each potential outcome.
An entity may combine quantitative and qualitative analyses of assumptions and
underlying data to establish a reasonable expectation that the effects of
applying the guidance to a particular portfolio of contracts would not materially
differ from applying the guidance to each individual contract within that
portfolio. [ASU 2014-09.BC69]
Although Topic 606 does not provide specific guidance, the following factors
could be relevant to the analysis.
— Type of customer – e.g. size, location, duration as a customer,
  creditworthiness, type of business.
— Contract terms – e.g. delivery terms, contract duration, cancellation terms,
  rights of return, nature of transaction price consideration.
— Performance obligations – e.g. product warranties, material rights,
  discounts and incentives, over-time or point-in-time obligations.
— Volume of contracts with similar characteristics – e.g. high volume of
  contracts with established history over time.



                   Question A66
                   Can a portfolio approach be used for some aspects
                   of the revenue model, but not all?

Interpretive response: Yes. Although there may be benefits of applying the
portfolio approach to all aspects of the revenue model, the portfolio approach
may be used for only some aspects or performance obligations. For example, it
could be used to account for rights of return even though other types of
estimates and judgments required under the revenue model are made on a
contract-by-contract basis.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 51
                                                                                                       A. Scope



Scope of licensing implementation guidance and
illustrations

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Licensing
55-54 A license establishes a customer’s rights to the intellectual property of
an entity. Licenses of intellectual property may include, but are not limited to,
licenses of any of the following:
a. Software (other than software subject to a hosting arrangement that does
   not meet the criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5) and technology
b. Motion pictures, music, and other forms of media and entertainment
c. Franchises
d. Patents, trademarks, and copyrights.


Topic 606 provides implementation guidance specific to licenses of IP. The
licensing implementation guidance (paragraphs 606-10-55-54 through 55-65B)
and related examples (Examples 54 through 61B in paragraphs 606-10-55-362
through 55-399O) apply only to licenses of software that meet the criteria in
paragraph 985-20-15-5. Even if a contract states that a license to software is
part of the arrangement, a license does not exist for accounting purposes, and
the licensing implementation guidance (including the related examples) does
not apply, when those criteria are not met. Instead, the contract is for SaaS, to
which the licensing implementation guidance does not apply.
As will be outlined throughout this publication, determining whether an
arrangement involving software includes a license of IP for accounting
purposes, and therefore whether the licensing implementation guidance
applies, will significantly affect the accounting for that arrangement.
The following decision tree summarizes how Topic 606 applies to arrangements
that include a software license as compared to arrangements that do not
include a software license, such as SaaS arrangements.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                      52
                                                                                                       A. Scope



                                       Is the contract a
                                       sale or license of
                       Sale                   IP?


                                                    License


                                       Does the contract
                                       involving software                      License of IP
                                       include a license?          Yes


                                                       No

                                                                               Is the license
     Apply general                             SaaS                         distinct from non-
        model                                                               license goods or
                                                                                 services?


                                                            No                                                  Yes
                                               Apply the general guidance
                                               to the combined bundle and                    Does the customer have a
                                                 consider the nature of the                  right to access the entity's
                                               license when applying Step                                IP?
                                                             5.


                                                                                            Yes                                 No

                                                                                            Over-time                Point-in-
                                                                                              perf.                 time perf.
                                                                                            obligation              obligation


                                                  If the contract includes a
   Sales or usage-based
                                                     sales or usage based
  royalties are estimated
                                                  royalty, is the license (or
  and subject to general
                                       No          licenses) the prominent
    models constraint
                                                item(s) to which the royalty
       under Step 3
                                                            relates?

                                                                   Yes

                                                  Sales or usage-based
                                                 royalties recognized at
                                                  later of when sales or
                                                    usage occurs and
                                                      satisfaction of
                                                 performance obligation

Under Topic 606, the licensing implementation guidance does not apply to SaaS
arrangements – i.e. arrangements for which the hosted software does not meet
the criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5. SaaS arrangements are accounted for as
service obligations, not arrangements that transfer a license to IP. This means
that, as outlined in the preceding diagram, entities entering into SaaS
arrangements will apply the general revenue guidance – i.e. rather than the
licensing implementation guidance – on:
— whether to recognize revenue over time or at a point in time;
— how to measure progress toward satisfaction of the performance obligation
  (when revenue is recognized over time); and
— variable consideration (e.g. usage- or transaction-based fees).



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 53
                                                                                                       A. Scope


It is important to highlight, however, that the licensing implementation guidance
will come into play, to differing extents depending on the facts and
circumstances, if a combined performance obligation (i.e. a performance
obligation comprised of two or more promised goods or services) includes a
software license and a SaaS element (Question C310 discusses considerations in
evaluating whether a software license and a SaaS element are separate
performance obligations in a contract that includes both). For example, an entity
will generally need to consider the nature of the software license (i.e. as a right to
use the entity’s intellectual property, which would be satisfied at a point in time if
it were distinct, or a right to access the entity’s intellectual property, which would
be satisfied over time) that is part of the combined performance obligation in
determining how to account for that performance obligation. And if there is a
sales- or usage-based royalty, the licensing implementation guidance on such
royalties will apply if the software license is the predominant item to which the
royalty relates (the general guidance on variable consideration will apply if it is
not). The following chapters will further address each of these issues:
— Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract
  addresses considerations for determining whether a software license and a
  SaaS element are separate performance obligations (see Question C310).
— Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
  performance obligation addresses:
      —      identifying the nature of a software license;
      —      identifying the nature of a combined performance obligation that
             includes a license and other goods or services (e.g. a SaaS, professional
             services or PCS element); and
      —      the applicability of the exception for sales- or usage-based royalties for
             licenses of IP.




                  Excerpt from ASC 985-20

> Software Subject to a Hosting Arrangement
15-5 The software subject to a hosting arrangement is within the scope of
this Subtopic only if both of the following criteria are met:
a. The customer has the contractual right to take possession of the software
   at any time during the hosting period without significant penalty.
b. It is feasible for the customer to either run the software on its own
   hardware or contract with another party unrelated to the vendor to host
   the software.
15-6 For purposes of criterion (a) in the preceding paragraph 985-20-15-5, the
term significant penalty contains two distinct concepts:
a. The ability to take delivery of the software without incurring significant cost
b. The ability to use the software separately without a significant diminution
   in utility or value.
15-7 If the software subject to a hosting arrangement never meets the criteria
in paragraph 985-20-15-5, then the software is utilized in providing services and
is not within the scope of this Subtopic and, therefore, the development costs



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 54
                                                                                                       A. Scope


of the software should be accounted for in accordance with Subtopic 350-40
on internal-use software (see also paragraph 985-20-55-2).


In many arrangements that involve the customer’s use of the entity’s software,
the customer does not host the software – that is, the customer does not
download the software on to servers or computers that it owns or leases.
Rather, the software is hosted by the software entity/SaaS provider or a third
party. The software entity/SaaS provider will make the functionalities of the
software available to the customer through the internet or a dedicated
transmission line and will run the software application on either its own or a
third party’s hardware. In such arrangements, the question arises as to whether
the arrangement includes a software license or whether the customer, instead,
is receiving ‘software-as-a-service’ (SaaS). These arrangements may or may not
include a license of the software (explicitly or implicitly) and the customer may
or may not have the option to take possession of the software.
Paragraph 606-10-55-54(a) states that, even in a contract that relies upon
software for its fulfillment, a software license is not present in that arrangement
unless the criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5 are met. Those criteria are:
— the customer has the contractual right to take possession of the software
  at any time during the hosting period without significant penalty; and
— it is feasible for the customer to either run the software on its own
  hardware or contract with another party unrelated to the entity to host the
  software.
With respect to criterion (a), the notion of ‘without significant penalty’ includes
two concepts:
— the ability of the customer to take delivery of the software without incurring
  significant costs;
— the ability of the customer to use the software separately (i.e. on the
  customer’s own hardware or that of a third party) without a significant
  diminution in utility or value of the software.
Meanwhile, criterion (b) is met if:
— the customer has the IT infrastructure to host the software or is readily able
  to obtain such IT infrastructure (e.g. the customer can obtain the necessary
  hardware, and potentially services, from a third party); or
— there are unrelated, third-party hosting services readily available to the
  customer.
If either criterion in paragraph 985-20-15-5 is not met, the arrangement does not
include a software license; rather, the entity is providing SaaS. As outlined above,
SaaS is not subject to the licensing implementation guidance in Topic 606.
As the industry has evolved, and continues to evolve, it is increasingly common
for arrangements to include both an on-premise software element and a SaaS
element (e.g. a license to an on-premise software application – including one
that is hosted, but meets the requirements in paragraph 606-10-55-54(a) – and a
SaaS element or a SaaS application with an ‘offline’ mode). These
arrangements are often referred to as ‘hybrid SaaS’ or ‘hybrid cloud’
arrangements. Question C310 addresses what an entity should consider in
determining whether the on-premise element and the SaaS element are distinct



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 55
                                                                                                       A. Scope


from each other in a hybrid SaaS (hybrid cloud) arrangement. If the on-premise
and SaaS elements are not distinct from each other, the entity will generally
account for the combined performance obligation (comprised of the on-premise
and the SaaS elements) as a single service.
The diagram below illustrates the two paragraph 985-20-15-5 criteria, and
Questions A70 – A120 address application questions surrounding those criteria.

            Criterion (a):                                  ‘Without           — ability to take delivery
        The customer has the                              significant            without incurring significant
       contractual right to take                             penalty’            cost; and
    possession of the software at                           refers to:         — ability to use the software
     any time during the hosting                                                 separately without a
      period without significant                                                 significant reduction in
               penalty.                                                          utility or value.




                                                       Criterion (b)           — the customer has the IT
              Criterion (b):                                  is met             infrastructure to host the
  It is feasible for the customer to                       if either:            software or is readily able
    either run the software on its                                               to obtain such IT
   own hardware or contract with                                                 infrastructure; or
    another party unrelated to the                                             — there are unrelated, third
      entity to host the software.                                               party hosting services
                                                                                 readily available to the
                                                                                 customer.




  — If both criteria met »
        software license
  — If either criterion not met
        » SaaS arrangement




                   Question A70
                   Can the customer have a ‘contractual right to take
                   possession of the software at any time during the
                   hosting period’ if no such right is explicitly provided
                   for in the contract (or in any contract or other
                   agreement that is combined with that contract)?
Interpretive response: Yes. If the customer has an enforceable right to take
possession of the software as a matter of law, the fact that the contract does
not explicitly provide for that right in writing does not matter. It may be the case
in some jurisdictions in which the entity contracts that the relevant laws or
regulations, or the entity’s customary business practices, provide the customer




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 56
                                                                                                       A. Scope


with that enforceable right even if neither the customer, nor the entity, intended
for the contract to convey that right.



                   Question A80
                   Criterion (a) in paragraph 985-20-15-5 requires the
                   customer to have the right to take possession of
                   the software at any time during the hosting period
                   without significant penalty. How should entities
                   interpret ‘at any time’ in the context of this
                   criterion?
Interpretive response: We believe that judgment will need to be applied to the
specific facts and circumstances in order to determine whether this part of the
criterion in paragraph 985-20-15-5(a) is met, and that a contractual right to take
possession of the software (see Question A70) can meet that criterion even if
the customer did not have the right to take possession at every single point in
time of the hosting arrangement. The following table provides our analysis of
some common situations encountered in practice.

  Scenario                                                           Conclusion

  The customer has the right to take                                 The customer has the contractual right
  possession of the software at every single                         to take possession of the software at
  point in time during the contract.                                 any time during the hosting period.

  The customer has the right to take                                 The customer has the right to take
  possession of the software throughout                              possession of the software at any time
  the hosting arrangement except for:                                during the hosting period; the
  — the last few days of the hosting                                 restrictions described are not
        arrangement (or months of a long-                            substantive.
        term hosting arrangement); or
  — a few days of each month (e.g. the
        last five days or the first five days of
        each month) in a long-term hosting
        arrangement.

  The customer has the right to take                                 The customer does not have the right to
  possession of the software either:                                 take possession of the software at any
  — only at sporadic or specific points in                           time during the hosting period and,
        time (e.g. only on the last day of each                      therefore, the arrangement does not
        year) during the hosting arrangement;                        include a software license (i.e. it is a
        or                                                           SaaS arrangement).

  — only upon the occurrence of a
        contingent event that is neither
        within the control of the customer to
        make occur, nor reasonably certain to
        occur.

  The customer has the right to take                                 The customer does not have the right to
  possession of the software if the entity                           take possession of the software at any
  materially breaches the contract.                                  time during the hosting period and,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 57
                                                                                                       A. Scope



  Scenario                                                           Conclusion
                                                                     therefore, the arrangement does not
                                                                     include a software license (i.e. it is a
                                                                     SaaS arrangement).




                   Question A90
                   Paragraph 985-20-15-6(a) explains that having the
                   right to take possession of the software ‘without
                   significant penalty’ includes ‘the ability to take
                   delivery of the software without incurring
                   significant cost’. What costs should an entity
                   consider in determining if there is a significant
                   penalty and what would be considered significant?
Interpretive response: The focus of the analysis in this regard should be on
direct and incremental costs. The mere existence of some level of cost in
connection with taking possession of the software would not, by itself, result in
a ‘significant penalty’.
Direct and incremental costs include forfeited hosting (or other upfront) fees,
termination fees or penalties incurred to cancel the hosting arrangement.
Penalties include hosting fees the customer is required to continue to pay to
the entity after termination of the entity’s hosting services. Similarly, if the
customer would incur significant ‘switching costs’, that would also generally
constitute a penalty. For example, if the customer would be required to
invest in the IT infrastructure to host/support the software but would not
receive a commensurate reduction in hosting fees under the contract, that
deficiency would generally be considered a penalty from taking possession of
the software.
Although determining whether penalty costs are significant will require
judgment, we believe that costs that exceed 10% of the total contract fees
(e.g. software license fees as well as any initial, non-cancellable PCS and/or
hosting services fees) usually would be a strong indicator that the costs are
significant. However, all facts and circumstances should be considered, and a
penalty of less than 10% might be considered significant if it creates a
substantial disincentive for the customer to take possession of the software.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 58
                                                                                                       A. Scope



                   Question A100
                   What considerations should be made in
                   determining whether the customer can use the
                   software separately from the entity’s hosting
                   services without a significant diminution in utility
                   or value when evaluating criterion (b) in
                   paragraph 985-20-15-6?
Interpretive response: The determination of whether a customer in a hosting
arrangement will suffer a significant diminution in utility or value of the software
if it takes possession of the software may depend on a variety of factors,
including, but not limited to, the following.
— Whether taking possession of the hosted software negates the customer’s
  right to receive one or more specified upgrades or unspecified updates or
  upgrades that are considered integral to maintaining the utility of the
  software (see Question C170). If the customer forfeits its right to receive
  integral updates or upgrades by taking possession of the software, this
  would indicate the customer will incur a significant diminution in utility and
  value of the software from terminating the hosting services.
— Whether there are significant features or functionalities available to the
  customer when the software is hosted by the entity that would no longer
  be available to the customer if the customer took possession of the
  software. This would indicate the customer will incur a significant
  diminution in utility or value of the software from terminating the hosting
  services.
— Whether incremental resources must be obtained by the customer to
  maintain the functionality of the software if the customer elects to take
  possession of the software. For example, the customer may need to obtain
  an additional software product (e.g. relational database software) or
  implement additional manual procedures to compensate for a loss of utility
  in the software included in the hosting arrangement. The need to obtain
  incremental resources to maintain the functionality of the software would
  indicate that the customer will experience a significant reduction in utility of
  the software from taking possession of it.
— If the customer has the ability to transfer the hosting services to another
  provider, while retaining the right to future specified or unspecified
  upgrades and enhancements of the software, that may be an indicator that
  it would not incur a significant diminution of utility or value from taking
  possession of the software.
However, we believe that a significant diminution in utility or value from taking
possession of the software does not impose a ‘significant penalty’ on the
customer if:
— there are readily available resources (e.g. on-premise software, third-party
  hosting services or hardware that is sold separately) that can replace the
  significant diminution in utility or value the customer would experience from
  taking possession of the software; and




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 59
                                                                                                       A. Scope


— the cost to obtain those readily available resources is comparable to the
  cost of the hosting services they will replace.
Importantly, even if both of the criteria in the preceding paragraph are met, the
customer may still incur a ‘significant penalty’. For example, as outlined in
Question A90, if the customer has to pay a significant termination fee, forfeit a
significant upfront fee or continue to pay the entity hosting fees, the fact that it
can replace a significant diminution in utility or value at a cost comparable to the
software entity’s hosting services does not mean the customer would not incur
a significant penalty from taking possession of the software.



                   Example A100.1
                   Software license or SaaS (1)
Customer enters into a three-year contract with ABC Corp. to access ABC’s
software (Product H) in a hosting arrangement. The contract requires an upfront
payment of $500,000, and also includes a stated monthly fee of $25,000 for the
hosting services provided by ABC.
In addition to these basic facts:
— Customer has the enforceable right under the contract to take possession
  of the software at any time for no additional fee and, if it does so, will no
  longer be required to pay the $25,000 monthly fee for the hosting services.
— If Customer takes possession of Product H, it loses the right to future
  unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements. However, Product H is
  a mature product that ABC updates infrequently and updates are typically
  minor in nature and not integral to maintaining the utility of Product H.
— Customer has significant and established IT capacity and resources such
  that the incremental costs of electing to take possession of the software
  from ABC would not be significant in comparison to the hosting service
  fees it would avoid.
— The stated hosting fees are equal to the observable stand-alone selling
  price for those services.
ABC determines that the contract includes a license to the Product H software
and hosting services. In accordance with paragraph 985-20-15-5:
— Customer has the contractual right to take possession of the Product H
  software at any time, and can do so without incurring a significant penalty.
  ABC concludes that Customer will not incur a significant penalty if it takes
  possession of the software because:
      —      there is no fee or penalty for terminating the hosting services;
      —      Customer does not have to continue to pay for the hosting services
             after they are terminated; and
      —      despite the fact that Customer will lose the right to obtain future
             updates, upgrades and enhancements, those items are not integral to
             maintaining the utility of Product H outside of the hosting environment
             because Product H is a mature software product. As such, Customer
             will not experience a significant diminution in utility or value of Product
             H from taking possession of Product H.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 60
                                                                                                       A. Scope


— It is feasible for Customer to run (i.e. host) the Product H software on its
  own because of its significant and established IT capacity and resources.
  Because Customer has a significant and established IT capacity it will incur
  no (or minimal) incremental costs to host the Product H software.



                   Example A100.2
                   Software license or SaaS (2)
Assume the same basic facts as in Example A100.1. In addition:
— Customer has the enforceable right under the contract to take possession
  of the software at any time for no additional fee and, if it does so, will no
  longer be required to pay the $25,000 monthly fee for the hosting services.
— There are third-party hosting service providers that can host the Product H
  software for Customer for a comparable monthly fee as the hosting
  services provided by ABC.
— All of the core functionality of Product H will remain available to Customer if
  they choose to take possession of the Product H software. However,
  significant search and data reporting functionalities are available to
  Customer only when the Product H software is connected to ABC’s
  proprietary, hosted database, which is only accessible to customers using
  Product H within ABC’s hosting environment.
ABC determines that the contract does not include a license to the Product H
software and, therefore, is a SaaS arrangement. This is because, while it is
feasible for Customer to have a third-party host software Product H in place of
ABC and Customer has the contractual right to take possession of the
Product H software at any time, it cannot take possession of the software
without incurring a ‘significant penalty’.
ABC concludes that Customer will incur a significant penalty if it takes
possession of the Product H software because:
— Customer will lose access to ABC’s proprietary, hosted database, without
  which significant functionalities will not be available to Customer; and
— there are no other readily available resources Customer could use to
  replace those functionalities because ABC’s database is proprietary and
  only available to customer using Product H within ABC’s hosting
  environment.



                   Example A100.3
                   Software license or SaaS (3)
Assume the same basic facts as in Examples A100.1 and A100.2.
In addition to the basic facts, the following additional facts are relevant:
— Customer has the enforceable right under the contract to take possession
  of the software at any time.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 61
                                                                                                       A. Scope


— The contract requires that Customer provide six months’ notice to
  terminate the hosting services. That is, on Day 1, if Customer takes
  possession of the Product H software and terminates the hosting services
  accordingly, it will still have to pay $150,000 in hosting services fees
  ($25,000 × 6 months).
ABC determines that the contract does not include a license to the Product H
software and, therefore, is a SaaS arrangement. This is because, while
Customer has the contractual right to take possession of the Product H
software at any time, it cannot do so without incurring a ‘significant penalty’.
ABC concludes that Customer will incur a significant penalty if it takes
possession of the Product H software based on the six-month ‘notice period’.
The six-month notice requirement constitutes a significant penalty because
Customer must pay this amount without receiving benefit for the fees paid (i.e.
it will receive no services in return for those fees) and because that amount of
$150,000 exceeds 10% of the fees under the contract ($500,000 upfront fee +
$900,000 in hosting services fees).




                   Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The criteria for determining whether a hosting arrangement includes a software
license was not changed by ASU 2014-09 or any of the subsequent revenue-
related ASUs. Consequently, the analysis of whether a hosting arrangement
includes a software license under Topic 606 should be relatively consistent with
the analysis of whether a hosting arrangement includes a software element
under legacy US GAAP.



                   Question A110
                   If software will be hosted on entity servers that are
                   leased by the customer, is there a software license?

Interpretive response: Yes. Hosting software on entity servers that are leased
by the customer is no different from hosting the software on servers owned by
the customer. In either case, there is a software license because the customer
has possession of the software.
Importantly, it does not matter why a lease is determined to exist. For example,
in some cases, customers will explicitly lease equipment from the entity. In
those cases, there is also typically an explicit software license (i.e. the intent of
the arrangement is to grant the customer a software license). However, in other
cases, an ‘embedded lease’ may exist even if there is no explicit lease
agreement or any lease mentioned in the contract with the customer. For
example, under Topic 842 (leases) a customer may be leasing a server from the
software entity if the server is dedicated to the customer (i.e. the server is not
used to host software or provide services for any other customer) even if there
is no mention of a lease in the contract and that server is housed in the entity’s
data center (e.g. the server may be viewed by the entity as merely part of the
data center).



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 62
                                                                                                       A. Scope


Because the entity’s accounting for the contract may differ significantly
depending on whether there is or is not a software license in the arrangement,
it will be important for entities that enter into hosting arrangements (including
those that may be characterized solely as SaaS arrangements) with customers
to consider whether they are leasing the equipment used to host the software
to the customer. And if so, the entity should account for the arrangement as
one that includes a software license (i.e. rather than as a SaaS arrangement).



                   Question A120
                   Is the conclusion about whether a software license
                   is present in a contract with a customer affected by
                   the customer’s or the software entity’s use of a
                   third-party hosting service?
Interpretive response: Determining whether a contract includes a software
license is not affected by whether the customer uses a third party to host
the entity’s software or whether the entity engages a third party to host
the software.
The fact that the customer uses a third-party hosting provider, or would be
required to use a third-party hosting provider if it were to exercise its right to
take possession of the software in a hosting arrangement, rather than hosting
the software on its own IT equipment, does not affect the conclusion that
would otherwise be reached by the entity about whether the contract includes
a software license.
Similarly, the fact that the entity uses a third party to host its software, rather
than hosting the software in its own data center, should not change the
conclusion that would otherwise be reached as to whether the contract
includes a software license from that which would be reached if the entity
were hosting the software itself; this includes the possibility that the customer
could be deemed to be leasing (likely sub-leasing from the entity) the third
party’s equipment.



                   Example A120.1
                   Software license or SaaS
ABC Corp.’s typical customer contract provides customers with the right to use
its software (Product J) on a SaaS basis. ABC hosts Product J using a third-party
hosting provider (XYZ), rather than hosting Product J in its own data center.
ABC’s customers are not permitted to take possession of Product J. ABC
manages and controls the hosting services from XYZ associated with Product J,
i.e. ABC has the contract with XYZ for the hosting services. ABC bills
customers on a monthly or quarterly basis, which includes proportional
reimbursement of ABC’s actual costs for the XYZ hosting services related to
Product J.
Customer A (an existing customer of XYZ) has expressed an interest in
deploying Product J in its own XYZ hosting environment, rather than ABC’s, to
take advantage of Customer A’s favorable contract terms and pricing



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 63
                                                                                                       A. Scope


arrangement with XYZ – i.e. Customer A will realize savings in actual hosting
costs by structuring the arrangement in this manner. Notwithstanding
Customer A’s desire to achieve these cost savings, it is the intent of both ABC
and Customer A to have ABC manage and control the hosting of Product J in
the same manner as ABC manages and controls its typical arrangements; this
includes the provision that Product J cannot be removed from the XYZ
hosting environment.
To permit this arrangement, a provision has been added to Customer A’s
agreement with XYZ to give ABC access, billing, control and management
rights/responsibilities for a separate Customer A account with XYZ that is
dedicated to hosting Product J. Customer A is not permitted to take possession
of the Product J software or transfer the software to another hosting provider
or another Customer A account with XYZ.
Notwithstanding the specifics of the new contractual provision, ABC
determines that its contract with Customer A includes a license to Product J
(i.e. that the contract is not a SaaS arrangement), and does not include hosting
services. This is because under its contract with Customer A, ABC’s
performance obligations do not include hosting Product J for Customer A
because XYZ is providing the hosting services to Customer A, not ABC. In
contrast, under ABC’s typical customer arrangements, even though XYZ also
hosts Product J, ABC is the principal to the customer arrangement for those
hosting services. ABC is not a principal in the Customer A arrangement with
XYZ.
Because ABC concludes that there is a license to Product J in the Customer A
arrangement, that license is subject to the licensing implementation guidance in
Topic 606. ABC transfers control of the license to Customer A when ABC
delivers the license to Customer A’s hosting agent (XYZ) – i.e. assuming the
license term has begun and other considerations outlined in Chapter F –
Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation
have been satisfied.
In addition, ABC will need to consider whether its promises to provide technical
support and unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements (which it will
provide to Customer A in connection with Product J), and to manage Customer
A’s hosting account for Product J are separate performance obligations (see
Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                Revenue for software and SaaS                        64
                                                             B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




B.   Step 1: Identify the
     contract with the customer
     Questions and Examples
     Overview
     Determining whether a contract exists
     Questions & answers
     Q&A B10                   If a software entity obtains signed contracts as its customary
                               business practice does the contract have to be signed by both
                               parties for a contract to exist?
     Q&A B20                   What should a contract with a customer describe in order to
                               demonstrate that the parties can each identify their rights
                               regarding the promised goods or services and the payment
                               terms for those goods or services (i.e. that criteria b. and c. in
                               paragraph 606-10-25-1 are met)?
                               Example B20.1: Contract approval and customary business
                               practice, Part I
                               Example B20.2: Contract approval and customary business
                               practice, Part II
     Q&A B30                   If a Master Service Agreement (MSA) exists between an entity
                               and a customer under which the customer requests goods and
                               services through purchase orders is the MSA a contract under
                               Topic 606?
                               Example B30.1: Prepaid spending account
     Q&A B40                   Does the form of an entity’s contracts and evidence of approval
                               have to be consistent across customers?
                               Example B40.1: Form of the contract and approval does not
                               affect contract conclusion
     Q&A B50                   Are ‘side agreements’ contracts under Topic 606?
     Q&A B60                   Does a contract exist for services such as PCS or SaaS when
                               an entity continues to provide the services after the expiration
                               of the contract with the customer?
                               Example B60.1: Contract continuation for PCS
     Q&A B70                   Does a fiscal funding clause affect whether a contract exists
                               under Topic 606?
     Q&A B80                   What factors should an entity consider in determining whether
                               the amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be
                               entitled includes an implicit price concession?




     © 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
     member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        65
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



                          Example B80.1: Collectibility threshold assessed based on
                          amount the entity expects to receive for the goods or services
                          transferred
Q&A B85                   How is ‘substantially all’ defined for the collectibility
                          assessment?
Q&A B90                   In assessing collectibility, an entity considers only the likelihood
                          of payment for goods or services that ‘will be transferred to the
                          customer’. What does this mean in the context of typical
                          software related service arrangements (e.g. SaaS arrangements
                          or PCS services sold separately from a software license)?
Q&A B100                  Does an entity’s ability and intent to stop providing goods or
                          services automatically mean that the collectibility criterion will
                          be met?
                          Example B100.1: Assessment of collectibility for low credit
                          quality new customer
Q&A B110                  How are software licenses considered when determining the
                          ‘goods or services that will be transferred to the customer’?
                          Example B110.1: Credit risk is not mitigated for a software
                          license and PCS
Q&A B115                  How should a software vendor assess collectibility for a
                          portfolio of contracts?
Q&A B120                  Do extended payment terms affect the evaluation of the
                          collectibility criterion?
Q&A B125                  Can revenue be recognized on a cash basis when the
                          collectibility criterion is not met and the entity continues to
                          provide goods or services to the customer?
Q&A B126                  When does an entity reassess the collectibility criterion?
                          Example B126.1: Cash received when collectibility criterion is
                          not met
Q&A B127                  Is a receivable recognized if the collectibility criterion is not
                          met?
Q&A B130                  What is the contract term in a period-to-period (e.g. month-to-
                          month or year-to-year) contract that (a) may be canceled by
                          either party or (b) may be canceled by the customer only?
                          Example B130.1: Contract with unspecified term cancellable
                          by either party
                          Example B130.2: Contract with a specified term cancellable by
                          either party
                          Example B130.3: Term-based license with a reseller with
                          monthly cancellation
                          Example B130.4: Perpetual license
                          Example B130.5: Presentation of prepayment liability for
                          cancellable contracts



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        66
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



Q&A B140                  How does a termination penalty affect the assessment of the
                          contract term?
                          Example B140.1: Past practice of allowing customers to
                          terminate without enforcing collection of the termination
                          penalty
                          Example B140.2: Contract term with decreasing termination
                          penalty
Q&A B150                  Does forfeiture of a significant upfront fee constitute a
                          termination penalty?
Q&A B160                  Does a cancellation provision exist if the contract is silent as to
                          cancellation or termination?
Q&A B170                  Does a cancellation provision available only upon a substantive
                          breach of contract affect the contract term?
Q&A B180                  Does a contract exist during ‘free-trial’ periods before the
                          customer accepts an offer to continue the services beyond the
                          free-trial period?
                          Example B180.1: Free-trial period
Q&A B190                  What constitutes ‘at or near the same time’ when evaluating
                          whether two or more contracts should be combined?
Q&A B200                  If an entity and/or its customer have multiple divisions
                          (business units), should contracts entered into between
                          different divisions be evaluated for possible combination?
Q&A B210                  Are the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-9 similar to the
                          indicators of contract combination in legacy US GAAP?
                          Example B210.1: Combining contracts, Part I
                          Example B210.2: Combining contracts, Part II
                          Example B210.3: Combining contracts, Part III
Q&A B220                  Can contracts entered into at or near the same time with
                          multiple customers be combined?
Q&A B230                  Do purchase orders under the same MSA need to be
                          combined?




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        67
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




        Step 1                    Step 2                    Step 3                    Step 4                     Step 5


                                Identify                 Determine                 Allocate the
     Identify the                                                                                             Recognize
                              performance                transaction               transaction
       contract                                                                                                revenue
                               obligations                  price                      price




Overview
Topic 606 identifies when a contract with a customer exists and, therefore, is
accounted for under Topic 606; how to account for consideration received
before concluding that a contract exists; and when two or more contracts
should be combined for purposes of applying the model.




                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

20 Glossary
Contract
An agreement between two or more parties that creates enforceable rights
and obligations.
Customer
A party that has contracted with an entity to obtain goods or services that are
an output of the entity’s ordinary activities in exchange for consideration.
> Identifying the Contract
25-1 An entity shall account for a contract with a customer that is within the
scope of this Topic only when all of the following criteria are met:
a. The parties to the contract have approved the contract (in writing, orally, or
   in accordance with other customary business practices) and are committed
   to perform their respective obligations.
b. The entity can identify each party’s rights regarding the goods or services
   to be transferred.
c. The entity can identify the payment terms for the goods or services to be
   transferred.
d. The contract has commercial substance (that is, the risk, timing, or amount
   of the entity’s future cash flows is expected to change as a result of the
   contract).
e. It is probable that the entity will collect substantially all of the consideration
   to which it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will
   be transferred to the customer (see paragraphs 606-10-55-3A through 55-
   3C). In evaluating whether collectibility of an amount of consideration is
   probable, an entity shall consider only the customer’s ability and intention
   to pay that amount of consideration when it is due. The amount of
   consideration to which the entity will be entitled may be less than the price




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        68
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



       stated in the contract if the consideration is variable because the entity
       may offer the customer a price concession (see paragraph 606-10-32-7).
25-2 A contract is an agreement between two or more parties that creates
enforceable rights and obligations. Enforceability of the rights and obligations in
a contract is a matter of law. Contracts can be written, oral, or implied by an
entity’s customary business practices. The practices and processes for
establishing contracts with customers vary across legal jurisdictions, industries,
and entities. In addition, they may vary within an entity (for example, they may
depend on the class of customer or the nature of the promised goods or
services). An entity shall consider those practices and processes in
determining whether and when an agreement with a customer creates
enforceable rights and obligations.
25-3 Some contracts with customers may have no fixed duration and can be
terminated or modified by either party at any time. Other contracts may
automatically renew on a periodic basis that is specified in the contract. An
entity shall apply the guidance in this Topic to the duration of the contract (that
is, the contractual period) in which the parties to the contract have present
enforceable rights and obligations. In evaluating the criterion in paragraph 606-
10-25-1(e), an entity shall assess the collectibility of the consideration promised
in a contract for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer
rather than assessing the collectibility of the consideration promised in the
contract for all of the promised goods or services (see paragraphs 606-10-55-
3A through 55-3C). However, if an entity determines that all of the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-1 are met, the remainder of the guidance in this Topic
shall be applied to all of the promised goods or services in the contract.
25-4 For the purpose of applying the guidance in this Topic, a contract does not
exist if each party to the contract has the unilateral enforceable right to
terminate a wholly unperformed contract without compensating the other party
(or parties). A contract is wholly unperformed if both of the following criteria
are met:
a. The entity has not yet transferred any promised goods or services to the
   customer.
b. The entity has not yet received, and is not yet entitled to receive, any
   consideration in exchange for promised goods or services.
25-5 If a contract with a customer meets the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1
at contract inception, an entity shall not reassess those criteria unless there is
an indication of a significant change in facts and circumstances. For example, if
a customer’s ability to pay the consideration deteriorates significantly, an entity
would reassess whether it is probable that the entity will collect the
consideration to which the entity will be entitled in exchange for the remaining
goods or services that will be transferred to the customer (see paragraphs 606-
10-55-3A through 55-3C).
25-6 If a contract with a customer does not meet the criteria in paragraph 606-
10-25-1, an entity shall continue to assess the contract to determine whether
the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 are subsequently met.
25-7 When a contract with a customer does not meet the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-1 and an entity receives consideration from the customer,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        69
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



the entity shall recognize the consideration received as revenue only when
one or more of the following events have occurred:
a. The entity has no remaining obligations to transfer goods or services to the
   customer, and all, or define, of the consideration promised by the
   customer has been received by the entity and is nonrefundable.
b. The contract has been terminated, and the consideration received from the
   customer is nonrefundable.
c. The entity has transferred control of the goods or services to which the
   consideration that has been received relates, the entity has stopped
   transferring goods or services to the customer (if applicable) and has no
   obligation under the contract to transfer additional goods or services, and
   the consideration received from the customer is nonrefundable.
25-8 An entity shall recognize the consideration received from a customer as a
liability until one of the events in paragraph 606-10-25-7 occurs or until the
criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 are subsequently met (see paragraph 606-10-
25-6). Depending on the facts and circumstances relating to the contract, the
liability recognized represents the entity’s obligation to either transfer goods or
services in the future or refund the consideration received. In either case, the
liability shall be measured at the amount of consideration received from the
customer.
• > Assessing Collectibility
55-3A Paragraph 606-10-25-1(e) requires an entity to assess whether it is
probable that the entity will collect substantially all of the consideration to
which it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be
transferred to the customer. The assessment, which is part of identifying
whether there is a contract with a customer, is based on whether the
customer has the ability and intention to pay the consideration to which the
entity will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be
transferred to the customer. The objective of this assessment is to evaluate
whether there is a substantive transaction between the entity and the
customer, which is a necessary condition for the contract to be accounted for
under the revenue model in this Topic.
55-3B The collectibility assessment in paragraph 606-10-25-1(e) is partly a
forward-looking assessment. It requires an entity to use judgment and consider
all of the facts and circumstances, including the entity’s customary business
practices and its knowledge of the customer, in determining whether it is
probable that the entity will collect substantially all of the consideration to
which it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that the entity
expects to transfer to the customer. The assessment is not necessarily based
on the customer’s ability and intention to pay the entire amount of promised
consideration for the entire duration of the contract.
55-3C When assessing whether a contract meets the criterion in
paragraph 606-10-25-1(e), an entity should determine whether the contractual
terms and its customary business practices indicate that the entity’s exposure
to credit risk is less than the entire consideration promised in the contract
because the entity has the ability to mitigate its credit risk. Examples of
contractual terms or customary business practices that might mitigate the
entity’s credit risk include the following:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        70
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



a. Payment terms—In some contracts, payment terms limit an entity’s
   exposure to credit risk. For example, a customer may be required to pay a
   portion of the consideration promised in the contract before the entity
   transfers promised goods or services to the customer. In those cases, any
   consideration that will be received before the entity transfers promised
   goods or services to the customer would not be subject to credit risk.
b. The ability to stop transferring promised goods or services—An entity may
   limit its exposure to credit risk if it has the right to stop transferring
   additional goods or services to a customer in the event that the customer
   fails to pay consideration when it is due. In those cases, an entity should
   assess only the collectibility of the consideration to which it will be entitled
   in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the
   customer on the basis of the entity’s rights and customary business
   practices. Therefore, if the customer fails to perform as promised and,
   consequently, the entity would respond to the customer’s failure to
   perform by not transferring additional goods or services to the customer,
   the entity would not consider the likelihood of payment for the promised
   goods or services that will not be transferred under the contract.
An entity’s ability to repossess an asset transferred to a customer should not
be considered for the purpose of assessing the entity’s ability to mitigate its
exposure to credit risk.
• • > Example 1—Collectibility of the Consideration
• • • > Case A—Collectibility Is Not Probable
55-95 An entity, a real estate developer, enters into a contract with a customer
for the sale of a building for $1 million. The customer intends to open a
restaurant in the building. The building is located in an area where new
restaurants face high levels of competition, and the customer has little
experience in the restaurant industry.
55-96 The customer pays a nonrefundable deposit of $50,000 at inception of
the contract and enters into a long-term financing agreement with the entity for
the remaining 95 percent of the promised consideration. The financing
arrangement is provided on a nonrecourse basis, which means that if the
customer defaults, the entity can repossess the building but cannot seek
further compensation from the customer, even if the collateral does not cover
the full value of the amount owed.
55-97 The entity concludes that not all of the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1
are met. The entity concludes that the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-1(e) is
not met because it is not probable that the entity will collect substantially all of
the consideration to which it is entitled in exchange for the transfer of the
building. In reaching this conclusion, the entity observes that the customer’s
ability and intention to pay may be in doubt because of the following factors:
a. The customer intends to repay the loan (which has a significant balance)
   primarily from income derived from its restaurant business (which is a
   business facing significant risks because of high competition in the
   industry and the customer’s limited experience).
b. The customer lacks other income or assets that could be used to repay the
   loan.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        71
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



c.     The customer’s liability under the loan is limited because the loan is
       nonrecourse.
55-98 The entity continues to assess the contract in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-6 to determine whether the criteria in paragraph 606-10-
25-1 are subsequently met or whether the events in paragraph 606-10-25-7
have occurred.
• • • > Case B—Credit Risk Is Mitigated
55-98A An entity, a service provider, enters into a three-year service contract
with a new customer of low credit quality at the beginning of a calendar
month.
55-98B The transaction price of the contract is $720, and $20 is due at the end
of each month. The standalone selling price of the monthly service is $20. Both
parties are subject to termination penalties if the contract is cancelled.
55-98C The entity’s history with this class of customer indicates that while the
entity cannot conclude it is probable the customer will pay the transaction price
of $720, the customer is expected to make the payments required under the
contract for at least 9 months. If, during the contract term, the customer stops
making the required payments, the entity’s customary business practice is to
limit its credit risk by not transferring further services to the customer and to
pursue collection for the unpaid services.
55-98D In assessing whether the contract meets the criteria in paragraph 606-
10-25-1, the entity assesses whether it is probable that the entity will collect
substantially all of the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for
the services that will be transferred to the customer. This includes assessing
the entity’s history with this class of customer in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-55-3B and its business practice of stopping service in
response to customer nonpayment in accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-
3C. Consequently, as part of this analysis, the entity does not consider the
likelihood of payment for services that would not be provided in the event of
the customer’s nonpayment because the entity is not exposed to credit risk for
those services.
55-98E It is not probable that the entity will collect the entire transaction price
($720) because of the customer’s low credit rating. However, the entity’s
exposure to credit risk is mitigated because the entity has the ability and
intention (as evidenced by its customary business practice) to stop providing
services if the customer does not pay the promised consideration for services
provided when it is due. Therefore, the entity concludes that the contract
meets the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-1(e) because it is probable that the
customer will pay substantially all of the consideration to which the entity is
entitled for the services the entity will transfer to the customer (that is, for the
services the entity will provide for as long as the customer continues to pay for
the services provided). Consequently, assuming the criteria in paragraph 606-
10-25-1(a) through (d) are met, the entity would apply the remaining guidance
in this Topic to recognize revenue and only reassess the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-1 if there is an indication of a significant change in facts or
circumstances such as the customer not making its required payments.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        72
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



• • • > Case C—Credit Risk Is Not Mitigated
55-98F The same facts as in Case B apply to Case C, except that the entity’s
history with this class of customer indicates that there is a risk that the
customer will not pay substantially all of the consideration for services received
from the entity, including the risk that the entity will never receive any payment
for any services provided.
55-98G In assessing whether the contract with the customer meets the
criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1, the entity assesses whether it is probable
that it will collect substantially all of the consideration to which it will be
entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the
customer. This includes assessing the entity’s history with this class of
customer and its business practice of stopping service in response to the
customer’s nonpayment in accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-3C.
55-98H At contract inception, the entity concludes that the criterion in
paragraph 606-10-25-1(e) is not met because it is not probable that the
customer will pay substantially all of the consideration to which the entity will
be entitled under the contract for the services that will be transferred to the
customer. The entity concludes that not only is there a risk that the customer
will not pay for services received from the entity, but also there is a risk that
the entity will never receive any payment for any services provided.
Subsequently, when the customer initially pays for one month of service, the
entity accounts for the consideration received in accordance with
paragraphs 606-10-25-7 through 25-8. The entity concludes that none of the
events in paragraph 606-10-25-7 have occurred because the contract has not
been terminated, the entity has not received substantially all of the
consideration promised in the contract, and the entity is continuing to provide
services to the customer.
55-98I Assume that the customer has made timely payments for several
months. In accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-6, the entity assesses the
contract to determine whether the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 are
subsequently met. In making that evaluation, the entity considers, among other
things, its experience with this specific customer. On the basis of the
customer’s performance under the contract, the entity concludes that the
criteria in 606-10-25-1 have been met, including the collectibility criterion in
paragraph 606-10-25-1(e). Once the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 are met,
the entity applies the remaining guidance in this Topic to recognize revenue.
• • • > Case D—Advance Payment
55-98J An entity, a health club, enters into a one-year membership with a
customer of low credit quality. The transaction price of the contract is $120,
and $10 is due at the beginning of each month. The standalone selling price of
the monthly service is $10.
55-98K On the basis of the customer’s credit history and in accordance with
the entity’s customary business practice, the customer is required to pay each
month before the entity provides the customer with access to the health club.
In response to nonpayment, the entity’s customary business practice is to stop
providing service to the customer upon nonpayment. The entity does not have
exposure to credit risk because all payments are made in advance and the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        73
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



entity does not provide services unless the advance payment has been
received.
55-98L The contract meets the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-1(e) because it
is probable that the entity will collect the consideration to which it will be
entitled in exchange for the services that will be transferred to the customer
(that is, one month of payment in advance for each month of service).


Determining whether a contract exists
Definition of a contract
Topic 606 defines a ‘contract’ as an agreement between two or more parties
that creates enforceable rights and obligations and specifies that enforceability
is a matter of law. Consequently, the assessment of whether a contract exists
does not focus on the form of the contract. Contracts can be written, oral or
implied by an entity’s customary business practices, depending on the relevant
laws and regulations under which the contract is governed.
The assessment of whether a contract exists may require significant judgment
in some jurisdictions or for some arrangements and may result in different
conclusions for similar contracts in different jurisdictions. In some cases, the
parties to an oral or an implied contract (in accordance with customary business
practices) may have agreed to fulfill their respective obligations. In cases of
significant uncertainty about enforceability (e.g. oral or an implied contract), a
written contract and legal interpretation by qualified counsel may be required to
support a conclusion that the parties to the contract have approved and are
committed to perform their respective obligations. An entity should assess
whether the parties intend to be bound by the terms and conditions of the
contract. This evaluation may include an assessment of an entity’s customary
business practices and past practice of what has been enforced.

Wholly unperformed contracts
A contract does not exist for accounting purposes if each party to the contract
has the unilateral right to terminate a ‘wholly unperformed’ contract without
compensating the other party (or parties). A contract is wholly unperformed if
two criteria are met:
— the entity has not yet transferred any promised goods or services to the
  customer; and
— the entity has not yet received, and is not yet entitled to receive, any
  consideration in exchange for promised goods or services.

Contract identification criteria
The Boards decided to supplement the definition of a contract by specifying
additional criteria beyond legal enforceability that must be met for an entity to
conclude a contract exists in accordance with Topic 606 and can apply the
revenue model in Topic 606 to that contract. The Boards decided that when
some or all of those criteria are not met, it is questionable whether the contract
establishes enforceable rights and obligations. Therefore, a contract with a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        74
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



customer is subject to the revenue model in Topic 606 only when it is legally
enforceable and meets all of the following criteria.

                                                   A contract exists if...




                                                                        Rights to goods or services and payment
    Collection of consideration is probable
                                                                                 terms can be identified




                                                                              It is approved and the parties are
           It has commercial substance
                                                                                committed to their obligations




Two of those criteria are that (1) the parties must have approved the contract
and be committed to performing their respective obligations and (2) each
party’s rights with respect to the goods and services, as well as the payment
terms, can be identified. At the financial reporting date, a contract may still be
(a) subject to contingencies (such as a substantive additional review yet to
occur or authorization yet to be obtained), (b) in a preliminary stage (such as a
letter of intent) or (c) require additional negotiations and subsequent
amendments or revisions. In such cases, criteria (1) and (2) are likely not met
and, therefore, a contract does not exist and the revenue model in Topic 606
will not yet apply.
However, there may be scenarios in which an entity continues to provide
services to a customer after expiration of a contract but during contract
extension negotiations. These fact patterns are discussed in Question B60 and
Example B60.1.
If all of the criteria to account for a contract with a customer under Topic 606
have not been met, the entity continually reassesses the arrangement against
them and applies the revenue model in Topic 606 to the contract from the date
on which all of the criteria are met, which may result in a cumulative effect
revenue adjustment for the entity’s performance to-date (e.g. to recognize
revenue based on the goods or services transferred to the customer before a
contract was determined to exist). In contrast, if a contract meets all of the
criteria at contract inception, an entity does not reassess any of those criteria
unless there is a significant change in facts and circumstances. If, on
reassessment, an entity determines that the criteria are no longer met, then it
ceases to apply the revenue model to the contract from that date but does not
reverse any revenue previously recognized.
An entity may have a pattern of frequently renegotiating the terms of the
contract or have a history of providing concessions to the customer. Typically,
such a pattern or history will not affect whether enforceable rights and
obligations exist before the renegotiation or concession, or prevent the parties
from identifying those rights and obligations, and therefore will not affect



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        75
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



whether there is a contract between the parties within the scope of the
revenue model. Rather, subsequent renegotiations would follow the contract
modification guidance (see Chapter G – Contract modifications) and a pattern of
granting concessions would affect either (or both) the entity’s identification of
the promised goods or services in the contract (see Question C90) or its
determination of the transaction price for the contract (see Question D130).
However, we believe it is possible that in very unusual circumstances (e.g.
significant actions that are unpredictable), an entity’s pattern or history could be
of such a nature that the entity would not be able to conclude the parties to the
contract can identify all of their respective rights and obligations (including
customer payment terms). In that case, the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1
would not be met and a contract within the scope of the revenue model would
not yet exist.

Consideration received from a customer before meeting the
contract identification criteria
The following flow chart describes the accounting for consideration received
from a customer when the criteria for contract existence in Topic 606 are not
met (see paragraph 606-10-25-7). This is also referred to as the alternative
model.


          Has the contract been
           terminated and is the
          consideration received                         Yes
              nonrefundable?


                              No


       Are there no remaining
    performance obligations and                                                Recognize
    has all, or substantially all, of                                        consideration
                                      Yes
  the consideration been received                                         received as revenue
       and is nonrefundable?

                              No

         Has the entity stopped
    transferring goods or services
     and there is no obligation to
      transfer additional goods or                        Yes
    services and all consideration
      received is nonrefundable?

                              No


               Recognize
             consideration
          received as a liability




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        76
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance specified that, if a
software entity has a customary business practice of using written contracts,
persuasive evidence of the arrangement is provided only by a contract signed
by both parties. Therefore, persuasive evidence of an arrangement would not
exist before the final license agreement being executed by both parties. In
circumstances where both parties had not executed the contract before the end
of the financial reporting period, revenue would not be recognized in that
period. Under Topic 606 if the placement of the customer order and shipment
of the goods constitute a legally enforceable contract and the other criteria are
met, then the new revenue model is applied even if it differs from an entity’s
customary business practices. Similar arrangements in different jurisdictions
may be treated differently if the determination of a legally enforceable contract
differs.
Legally enforceable rights may be less restrictive than persuasive evidence
Under the legacy guidance, an entity was required to have persuasive evidence
that both parties in a transaction understand the specific nature and terms of an
agreed-upon transaction. The form of persuasive evidence is required to be
consistent with customary business practices, such as a signed contract.
Under Topic 606, a contract must exist but it may be oral, written or implied by
customary business practices and does not have to follow a consistent form.
An entity will need to consider the jurisdiction in which the transaction occurs to
determine whether an agreement has created legally enforceable rights and
obligations. Similar contracts may produce different results based on the
jurisdiction. Therefore, it may be prudent to receive legal advice or a legal
opinion in certain situations.


Collectibility
One of the criteria that must be met for a contract to be within the scope of the
Topic 606 revenue model is that “it is probable that the entity will collect
substantially all of the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for
the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer.” That is, in
contrast to legacy US GAAP, under which collectibility was a recognition
criterion, under Topic 606, collectibility is a ‘gating question’ designed to
prevent entities from applying the revenue model to non-substantive
transactions, and thus recognizing revenue and a bad debt expense at the same
time.
In making the collectibility assessment, an entity considers the customer’s
ability and intention (which includes assessing its creditworthiness) to pay
substantially all of the amount of consideration to which the entity is entitled
when it is due. This assessment is made after taking into consideration any
price concessions that the entity may offer to the customer. Concessions are
not related to a customer’s ability and intention to pay the consideration in the
contract; rather, concessions are typically granted in response to other factors




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        77
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



such as competition and price pressures, sales channel overload and regulatory
changes. See Question B85 for further information regarding ‘substantially all.’
Judgment will be required in evaluating whether the likelihood that an entity will
not receive the full amount of stated consideration in a contract gives rise to a
collectibility issue or a price concession. Topic 606 includes two examples of
implicit price concessions: a life science prescription drug sale (Example 2) and
a transaction to provide healthcare services to an uninsured (i.e. self-pay)
patient (Example 3). In both examples, the entity concludes that the transaction
price is not the stated price or standard rate and that the promised
consideration is variable. Consequently, an entity may need to determine the
transaction price in Step 3 of the model (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the
transaction price), including any price concessions, before concluding on the
Step 1 collectibility criterion.
The collectibility threshold is applied to the amount to which the entity expects
to be entitled in exchange for the goods and services that will be transferred to
the customer, which may not be the stated contract price or the entire
transaction price of the contract. The assessment considers:
— the entity’s legal rights;
— past practice;
— how the entity intends to manage its exposure to credit risk throughout the
  contract; and
— the customer’s ability and intention to pay.
The collectibility assessment is limited to the consideration attributable to the
goods or services to be transferred to the customer for the non-cancellable
term of the contract. For example, if a contract has a two-year term but either
party can terminate after one year without penalty, then an entity assesses the
collectibility of the consideration promised in the first year of the contract (i.e.
the non-cancellable term of the contract).
The collectibility assessment is also limited to the consideration attributable to
the goods or services the entity will transfer to the customer after considering
its ability to mitigate any credit risk of the customer. That is, if there is a
question about the customer’s ability and intent to pay for all of the promised
goods or services in the contract, but the entity has the ability and the intent
(e.g. based on its customary business practices) to mitigate that credit risk by
refusing to transfer further goods or services if the customer does not fulfill its
obligations to pay the entity, the collectibility assessment is limited to whether
the customer will pay substantially all of the consideration to which the entity is
entitled for those goods or services the entity will transfer before it
discontinues further performance.
For example, if it is not probable that a customer will pay all of the monthly fees
to which a SaaS provider expects to be entitled under a three-year SaaS
arrangement, the contract may still be subject to the revenue model if it is
probable the customer will pay for some of the services (e.g. the first year of
the SaaS) and SaaS provider has the ability and intent to shut off the customer’s
access to the SaaS in a timely manner if the customer does not pay for the
service as amounts come due. However, if a contract exists the contract term
for purposes of applying the Topic 606 revenue model is three years (see
paragraph 606-10-25-3).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        78
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



An entity may further mitigate its credit risk by requiring security deposits or
advance payments. The security deposit, or requiring payments for service
periods in advance, may still not make it probable that the customer will pay
substantially all of the consideration for the promised goods or services in the
contract, but may ensure the entity will collect substantially all of the
consideration to which it expects to be entitled for the goods or services that it
will transfer to the customer after taking into consideration its ability and intent
to stop transferring goods or services as discussed in the preceding paragraph.


Term of the contract
Topic 606 is applied to the duration of the contract (i.e. the contractual period) in
which the parties to the contract have presently enforceable rights and
obligations. The determination of the contract term is important because it
affects many other aspects of the model. For example, it may affect:
— the measurement and allocation of the transaction price
— the collectibility assessment
— the timing of revenue recognition for non-refundable upfront fees when
  such fees will be recognized over the contract period – i.e. rather than over
  a longer period when the fee provides the customer with a material right
— contract modifications
— the identification of material rights.
The following are some key considerations applicable to determining the term
of a contract with a customer:
— Consideration payable on termination can affect assessment of contract
  term
      If a contract can be terminated (by either party or just by one party) only by
      compensating the other party (e.g. a penalty must be paid by the
      terminating party) and the right to compensation exists and is substantive
      throughout the contract period, then the contract term (i.e. the period for
      which enforceable rights and obligations exist for both parties) is the
      contractual period. However, a right to compensation may not exist, or may
      not be substantive, for the entire contract period. Under this circumstance,
      the term of the contract for revenue recognition purposes is the shorter of
      the specified contract period and the period up to the point at which the
      contract can be terminated without compensating the other party (or for
      which the termination penalty is no longer substantive). For example, if a
      SaaS provider and a customer enter into a five-year arrangement that can
      be canceled by the customer at any time by paying the SaaS provider a
      substantive compensation amount that decreases over the contract term
      until it reaches zero (or a non-substantive amount) at the end of the fourth
      year of the contract, then the contract term is four years.
      However, if a contract can be terminated without substantive compensation
      being paid, then its term does not extend beyond the goods and services
      already provided.
      In making the assessment of whether the right to compensation is
      substantive, an entity considers all relevant factors, including legal
      enforceability of the right to compensation on termination. In general, an




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        79
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



      entity’s past practice of not enforcing a termination penalty (e.g. not pursuing
      collection of a penalty not paid by the customer) does not affect the contract
      term unless that past practice changes the legally enforceable rights and
      obligations of the parties, in which case it could affect the contract term.
— Only the customer has a right to terminate the contract
      A customer may have the right to terminate the contract without penalty,
      while the entity is obligated to continue to perform until the end of a specified
      contract period. In that case, the contract is evaluated to determine whether
      the option for the customer to continue the contract (i.e. by not exercising its
      termination right) provides the customer with a material right to extend the
      contract beyond the date at which it can first terminate the contract. For
      example, a material right may exist if the contractual fee the customer will
      pay for periods after a termination option is at an incremental discount (see
      Question C410). Unless the option to continue the contract provides the
      customer with a material right, there is no accounting by the entity for the
      customer option and the contract term is presumed not to include periods
      subsequent to the date of the termination option.
— Compensation is broader than termination payments
      A payment to compensate the other party upon termination is any amount
      (or other transfer of value – e.g. equity instruments) other than a payment
      due as a result of goods or services transferred up to the termination date.
      It is not restricted only to payments explicitly characterized as termination
      penalties.
— Ability of either party to cancel the contract at discrete points in time may
  limit the term of the contract
      If an entity enters into a contract with a customer that can be renewed or
      canceled by either party at discrete points in time (e.g. at the end of each
      year) without paying substantive compensation to the other party, then the
      contract term is the period for which the contract cannot be canceled by
      either party. Upon commencement of each service period (e.g. a month in a
      month-to-month arrangement or a year in a year-to-year arrangement),
      where the entity has begun to perform and the customer has not canceled
      the contract, the entity generally has enforceable rights relative to fees
      owed for those services, and a contract exists for that period. For example,
      a customer may have the right to cancel a SaaS arrangement or a software
      post-contract customer support (PCS) arrangement at the end of each
      service year. If the customer does not cancel, and the entity begins
      providing SaaS or PCS services for the next service year following the
      optional termination date, generally there is a contract only for the period of
      time until the next optional termination date (i.e. only for the next year) and
      the entity has an enforceable right to payment for services provided during
      the period of time until the next optional termination date only.
— Evergreen contracts
      For purposes of assessing the contract term, an evergreen contract, such
      as a PCS arrangement that auto-renews, that is cancellable by either party
      (or just the customer) each period without a substantive penalty is no
      different from a similar contract structured to require affirmative renewal of
      the contract each period (e.g. one that requires the customer to place a



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        80
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



      new order or the parties to sign a new contract). In these situations, an
      entity should not automatically assume a contract period that extends
      beyond the current period (e.g. the current month or year).


Combining contracts

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Combination of Contracts
25-9 An entity shall combine two or more contracts entered into at or near the
same time with the same customer (or related parties of the customer) and
account for the contracts as a single contract if one or more of the following
criteria are met:
a. The contracts are negotiated as a package with a single commercial
   objective.
b. The amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the
   price or performance of the other contracts.
c. The goods or services promised in the contracts (or some goods or
   services promised in each of the contracts) are a single performance
   obligation in accordance with 606-10-25-14 through 25-22.


Determining when multiple contracts should be combined requires the use of
judgment, and both the form and the substance of an arrangement must be
considered in the evaluation. Often entities have continuing and multi-faceted
relationships with their customers (including resellers), and this business
relationship will lead to numerous signed or oral arrangements between the
two parties.
The following flow chart outlines the criteria in Topic 606 for determining when
an entity combines two or more contracts and accounts for them as a single
contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        81
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




  Are the contracts entered into at or
  near the same time with the same
   customer or related parties of the No
              customer?


                              Yes                                             Account for as
                                                                            separate contracts
   Are one or more of the following
             criteria met?
  — Contracts were negotiated as
     single commercial package
  — Consideration in one contract
     depends on the other contract                          No
  — Goods or services (or some of
     the goods and services) are a
     single performance obligation
     (see Chapter C)


                              Yes


           Account for contracts
            together as a single
                 contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance provided six
indicators for an entity to consider in determining whether multiple contracts
with the same customer should be combined and accounted for as a single
multiple-element arrangement. Although one of the indicators was that the
contracts are negotiated or executed within a short timeframe of each other, it
was only an indicator to be considered along with five other indicators.
Under Topic 606, entities are required to combine contracts if they are both (a)
entered into at or near the same time with the same customer (or related
parties) and (b) any one of three specified criteria is met. Although the
Topic 606 contract combination guidance is similar in concept to that in legacy
US GAAP guidance, the use of criteria in Topic 606 versus indicators in legacy
US GAAP may result in some different conclusions about whether multiple
contracts are combined.
Software-specific indicators vs specified criteria
Of the six indicators in legacy US GAAP, five are similar to the three specified
criteria in Topic 606 that must be considered if two contracts are entered into
‘at or near the same time’ as each other. This is also discussed in further detail
in Question B210.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        82
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



The indicator that negotiations are conducted jointly with two or more parties
(e.g. from different divisions of the same company) to do what in essence is a
single project is similar to paragraph 606-10-25-9(a) – that is, the criterion to
evaluate whether the contracts are negotiated as a package with a single
commercial objective.
The indicators that: (1) the fee for one or more contracts or agreements is
subject to refund, forfeiture or another concession if another contract is not
completed satisfactorily, and (2) the payment terms under one contract or
agreement coincide with performance criteria of another contract or agreement
are similar to paragraph 606-10-25-9(b) – that is, the criterion to evaluate
whether the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the
price or performance of the other contract.
The other two indicators in the legacy US GAAP software guidance: (1) the
different elements are closely interrelated or interdependent in terms of design,
technology or function, and (2) one or more elements in one contract or
agreement are essential to the functionality of an element in another contract
are similar to the guidance an entity evaluates in assessing whether the
criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-9(c) is met.
The contracts being negotiated or executed within a short timeframe of each
other is an indicator that two contracts should be combined under legacy
US GAAP but is a gating question under Topic 606 – that is, an entity evaluates
whether any of the three specific criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-9 are met only
if the contracts are entered into at or near the same time (see Question B190).
Legacy US GAAP guidance applied by SaaS providers
Legacy US GAAP revenue guidance applicable to SaaS providers contains a
rebuttable presumption that contracts entered into at or near the same time
with the same entity or related parties are a single contract. Topic 606 does not
include a similar rebuttable presumption and additional criteria must be met.
Therefore, it is possible that entities could come to different conclusions under
Topic 606 than they did under legacy US GAAP. However, we believe, in most
cases, if none of the three additional criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-9 are met,
an entity would have overcome the rebuttable presumption that existed in
legacy US GAAP and, therefore, would reach the same conclusion under either
Topic 606 or legacy US GAAP.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        83
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




Questions & answers
Determining whether a contract exists

                  Question B10
                  If a software entity obtains signed contracts as its
                  customary business practice does the contract have
                  to be signed by both parties for a contract to exist?
Interpretive response: No. Even when a software entity obtains agreements
signed by both parties as its customary business practice, a contract may exist
without, or before, both parties’ signatures (or even without either party’s
signature). This is because the assessment of whether a contract exists for
purposes of applying Topic 606 focuses on whether enforceable rights and
obligations exist on the parties based on the relevant laws and regulations,
rather than on the form of the contract (i.e. whether it is oral, implied, electronic
assent or written).
The assessment of whether there is an enforceable contract may require
significant judgment in some circumstances or jurisdictions and may require the
involvement of legal counsel. Similar contracts may give rise to different
enforceable rights and obligations based on the governing jurisdiction due to
differing laws and regulations. Further, entities should be cautious about
reaching conclusions that enforceability exists if there are substantive additional
reviews of the contract that have not yet occurred, or authorizations not yet
obtained, that could substantively alter the terms and conditions of the contract.
It will be important for entities to establish a process (and related controls) for
determining when enforceability exists because the contract identification
guidance in Topic 606 is not optional – that is, an entity cannot elect an
accounting policy to only account for contracts with customers that have been
dually-signed by both parties. For example, if a software entity transfers control
of a software license on or before the reporting date (see Chapter F – Step 5:
Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation),
but incorrectly determines whether a contract with the customer exists on or
before that reporting date, revenue may be over- or understated for the period.
Entities will also need to remember that for the revenue model in Topic 606 to
apply to a contract, all of the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 must be met,
including the collectibility criterion. Therefore, even if enforceability is
established, entities will have further work to do before they can begin to apply
the Topic 606 revenue model to the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        84
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Question B20
                  What should a contract with a customer describe in
                  order to demonstrate that the parties can each
                  identify their rights regarding the promised goods
                  or services and the payment terms for those goods
                  or services (i.e. that criteria b. and c. in
                  paragraph 606-10-25-1 are met)?
Interpretive response: In general, we believe an entity should consider
whether a contract includes a description of the following terms or conditions
(not exhaustive):
— the products (e.g. software licenses) and/or services (e.g. SaaS, PCS,
  implementation services) promised in the arrangement;
— the key attributes of any software license transferred to the customer (e.g.
  is it perpetual or time-based, or limited as to geography or use?);
— payment terms and fees due from the customer;
— delivery terms;
— warranties, rights (e.g. return rights), obligations and termination provisions
  – if any; and
— any other pertinent contractual provisions (e.g. price protection, service
  level guarantees).
Absent the above, it may be questionable as to whether an entity would be able
to identify each party’s rights and obligations regarding the transfer of goods or
services, including the customer’s obligation to pay for the goods or services.
However, the list above is not necessarily all-inclusive, nor does the absence of
one or more of these items necessarily mean that criteria b. and c. in
paragraph 606-10-25-1 cannot be met.
If an entity does not have a standard or customary business practice of relying
on written contracts to document an arrangement, it may have other forms of
written or electronic evidence to document the transaction. An entity should
consider developing policies for what constitutes enforceable rights and
obligations for each line of business or class of customer as they may be
different for each. However, regardless of the form of documentation, the
evidence should be final and include (or reference) all of the relevant terms and
conditions of the arrangement.



                  Example B20.1
                  Contract approval and customary business practice,
                  Part I
ABC Corp. licenses software and has a customary business practice of entering
into written contracts with its customers that describe the terms and conditions
under which customers can obtain a license to ABC’s software and of delivering
software upon receipt of an approved customer purchase order in writing.
Customer has established a purchasing policy that requires execution of a
contract with its vendors before it will accept delivery of any software products.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        85
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



ABC and Customer negotiate the terms of an arrangement and execute a
written master agreement that is signed by both parties on December 29,
20X4. The master agreement specifies the terms and conditions for the
licensing of ABC’s various software products (ABC licenses software
products A-Z), including the price for each license of each software product;
however, the master agreement does not commit Customer to purchase or
ABC to transfer any licenses. Subsequent to the execution of the master
agreement, Customer requests via an email to the account manager that ABC
transfer 100 perpetual user licenses to Software Product A in accordance with
the December 29 master agreement, for which it will submit a written purchase
order. ABC transfers control of the licenses to Customer on December 30,
20X4 (i.e. ABC has both provided a copy of the licensed software to Customer
and Customer can begin to use and benefit from the licenses – see Chapter F –
Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance
obligation). The actual purchase order from Customer is not received by ABC
until January 2, 20X5.
The master agreement signed by both parties on December 29, 20X4 does
not, by itself, create enforceable rights and obligations to transfer software
licenses because Customer may, or may not, choose to order under the
master agreement. However, that agreement, when combined with the email
from Customer requesting the 100 perpetual user licenses to Product A that
references the December 29 agreement, may constitute a contract in
accordance with Topic 606; however, whether the customer email creates
enforceable rights and obligations may vary depending on the jurisdiction.
After consultation with legal counsel, ABC concludes that the master
agreement in combination with the email communication from Customer
establish enforceable rights and obligations between the parties with
sufficient specificity to meet the contract criteria of Topic 606. Consequently,
assuming that this is a single element arrangement or that the 100 user
licenses to Product A are distinct from any services (e.g. PCS or professional
services) in the arrangement, ABC would recognize revenue for the transfer of
the 100 user licenses on December 30, 20X4.
By way of comparison, under legacy US GAAP, ABC would not have had
persuasive evidence of an arrangement because ABC has a standard business
practice of obtaining an approved customer purchase order in writing to
evidence its arrangements (which was not received until January 2, 20X5) and,
therefore, revenue related to the delivery of the 100 user licenses could not
have been recognized any earlier than January 2, 20X5.



                  Example B20.2
                  Contract approval and customary business practice,
                  Part II
Assume the same basic facts and circumstances as in Example B20.1, except
that:
— the master agreement outlining the terms and conditions for the licensing
  of ABC’s various software products (ABC licenses software products A-Z),
  including the price for each license of each software product, is signed,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        86
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



      dated and returned by Customer on January 2, 20X5. ABC signed the
      contract on December 22, 20X4 and it was confirmed received via email by
      Customer the same day;
— ABC receives a written purchase order from Customer for the 100
  perpetual user licenses to Product A on December 26, 20X4, referencing
  the master contract;
— ABC transfers control of the 100 perpetual user licenses to Customer on
  December 30, 20X4;
— ABC’s legal counsel represents that ABC had a valid contract as of
  December 26, 20X4 because the contract, signed by ABC and sent to
  Customer, constituted an offer that Customer accepted by executing the
  purchase order, even if it did not execute the agreement until a few
  days later.
There is a contract between the parties under Topic 606 as of December 26,
20X4. Consequently, assuming that this is a single element arrangement or that
the 100 user licenses to Product A are distinct from any services (e.g. PCS or
professional services) in the contract, ABC would recognize revenue for the
transfer of the 100 user licenses on December 30, 20X4.
By way of comparison, under legacy US GAAP, ABC would not have had
persuasive evidence of an arrangement because ABC has a standard business
practice of using signed written contracts. Because the contract was not signed
by both parties until January 2, 20X5, revenue related to the delivery of the
100 user licenses could not have been recognized any earlier than that date.



                  Question B30
                  If a Master Service Agreement (MSA) exists
                  between an entity and a customer under which the
                  customer requests goods and services through
                  purchase orders is the MSA a contract under
                  Topic 606?
Interpretive response: It depends, and this is illustrated in Example B20.1. If
the MSA merely defines the terms and conditions under which the customer
can order goods and services from the entity, but does not create enforceable
rights and obligations on the parties (i.e. for the entity to transfer goods or
services and for the customer to pay for those goods or services), there is not a
contract between the parties until the customer places a purchase order (PO)
under the MSA.
Some entities enter into MSAs with customers, which specify the basic terms
and conditions for subsequent transactions between the parties and are signed
by both the entity and customer. Under such arrangements, no additional
contractual agreement is executed and customers request products through
POs that specify the products and quantities. An MSA under which a customer
places POs in order to obtain goods or services does not itself constitute a
contract with a customer. This is because the MSA usually does not create
enforceable rights and obligations for the parties. As discussed in




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        87
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



Question B20, in order for a contract to be enforceable an entity should be able
to identify each party’s rights regarding the goods and services to be
transferred. While the MSA may specify the payment terms for goods or
services to be transferred, it usually does not specify the goods (e.g. licenses)
and services, including quantities thereof, to be transferred. Absent those
specific terms and conditions, a contract within the revenue model of
Topic 606 does not exist (i.e. the contract will not meet the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-1).
However, some MSAs may include a requirement for the customer to purchase
a minimum quantity of goods or services from the entity. This may be a
cumulative minimum for the MSA period or for periods within the MSA (e.g.
each year of a multi-year MSA). If the minimum is enforceable, then the MSA
itself may constitute a contract under Topic 606. However, if the entity’s past
practice of not enforcing MSA minimums results in a conclusion that the
minimums are not legally enforceable, the MSA would not be a contract under
Topic 606 (i.e. just as if the minimum were not included in the MSA at all). In
addition, if relevant experience with the customer suggests that the customer
will not meet the required minimums, and that the entity will not enforce them,
this would typically demonstrate the entity and the customer are not committed
to the minimums in the contract as per paragraph 606-10-25-1(a). Consequently,
even if the entity’s past practice of not enforcing MSA minimums doesn’t result
in a conclusion that the minimums are not legally enforceable, the contract may
still not meet all of the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1. It would therefore not
be a contract within the revenue model of Topic 606.
When an MSA does not create enforceable rights and obligations with respect
to transferring goods or services on its own, it will normally be the combination
of a PO with the MSA that does so. Therefore the MSA and the PO would be
evaluated together to determine whether the Step 1 criteria are met and a
contract exists. However, if additional steps must be taken for the PO to create
legally enforceable rights and obligations (e.g. executing a supplemental
contract or addendum to the MSA subsequent to receipt of the PO), then a
contract with a customer does not exist until those steps are completed. Other
examples of additional steps may include acceptance of the PO and/or issuance
of a sales order acknowledgment form by the entity to the customer. In some
cases, the customer may have to accept the invoice issued by the entity in
order for payment of consideration to be legally enforceable.
If either party can cancel a PO entered into under an MSA without penalty
before the entity transferring the ordered goods or services (e.g. before
transferring a software license), a contract does not exist, even if all the
conditions in paragraph 606-10-25-1 are met. In this situation, a contract is not
deemed to exist because each party has a right to terminate the contract and
the contract is wholly unperformed (the entity has not transferred any goods or
services to the customer and the entity has not yet received, and is not yet
entitled to receive, any consideration in exchange for the promised goods or
services) in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-4. However, in contrast, if the
entity transfers some or all of the goods or services in the PO, the contract
would no longer be wholly unperformed. The entity would at least be entitled to
receive consideration in exchange for the goods or services transferred to
the customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        88
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Example B30.1
                  Prepaid spending account
ABC Corp. enters into an arrangement with Customer whereby Customer
agrees to spend $2 million with ABC over a two-year period. Customer prepays
the $2 million at the date the prepaid spending account (PSA) is agreed to and
then ‘draws down’ from that balance over the two-year period by issuing
purchase orders (POs) for specific software licenses and services (which may
also require additional Statements of Work (SOWs) depending on the nature of
the service) against a mutually agreed price list. The price list includes most of
ABC’s software licenses and services. The PSA agreement establishes the
prepaid amount, the two-year term, and the price list that includes all of the
other relevant terms and conditions under which draw-downs (through POs) will
be made (e.g. warranties, delivery mechanisms and scope of rights granted for
the various software licenses). The $2 million upfront payment is subject to a
‘use it or lose it’ provision – that is, any amounts Customer does not use
through draw-downs by the end of the two-year PSA term is forfeited and none
of the $2 million is refundable to Customer.
The price list in the PSA permits Customer to select from a wide variety and
quantity of ABC’s software licenses and services. For many of the services, an
additional SOW would be necessary to establish the parameters of the services
to be provided, the PSA merely sets out the hourly rate that will be applied to
services of that nature. Consequently, even though the PSA sets out many
terms and conditions, and establishes, in effect, a minimum quantity of ABC’s
software and services that Customer will acquire, until Customer executes a
PO (and potentially also an SOW in the case of most professional services
offerings on the price list), ABC cannot identify each party’s rights regarding the
licenses or services to be transferred because the entity does not know what
software licenses or services it will be required to transfer. ABC also has no
obligation to transfer any licenses or services until Customer executes a PO
making its selections.
Only at the point in time that Customer executes a PO (and potentially also an
SOW) under the PSA does ABC have a present obligation to transfer licenses
and/or services to Customer and can ABC identify each party’s rights regarding
specific licenses and services it will transfer to Customer. Consequently, the
contract between ABC and Customer under Topic 606 is the combination of the
PSA and the PO (or PO/SOW if the PO includes services that require an SOW).
Each PO will be a separate contract unless it is combined with another PO
based on the contract combinations guidance in Topic paragraph 606-10-25-9.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, an MSA did not provide ‘persuasive evidence of an
arrangement’ if the entity’s customary business practice was to obtain a
purchase order (PO) from its customers to specify the products/services and
quantities. If so, the persuasive evidence of an arrangement criterion would
only be satisfied upon receipt of the customer’s PO. However, if the entity



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        89
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



intends to execute a supplemental contract or addendum to the MSA
subsequent to receipt of a PO, revenue may not be recognized until both the
entity and the customer execute that additional agreement.
The guidance in Topic 606 is similar from the perspective that an MSA may not
create enforceable rights and obligations on an entity and its customer.
However, under Topic 606, the question is about whether enforceable rights
and obligations exist without the PO, rather than on whether the form of the
contract without the PO is consistent with the entity’s customary business
practices. Because of this, entities may, in some circumstances, reach different
conclusions about the effect of having a PO on whether a contract exists under
Topic 606 than they would have reached about whether a PO was necessary to
having persuasive evidence of an arrangement.



                  Question B40
                  Does the form of an entity’s contracts and evidence
                  of approval have to be consistent across
                  customers?
Interpretive response: No. An entity may have a customary business practice
of using written contracts or purchase orders to evidence an arrangement.
However, the entity may enter into arrangements with certain customers
whose business practices of providing evidence of an arrangement differ from
the entity’s customary practice of using written contracts (i.e. certain customers
may license software products only by purchase orders). In fact, the entity may
not have a customary business practice if it principally relies on whatever
method its customers prefer. For example, an entity may not have a customary
business practice of using written contracts or purchase orders but certain of
the entity’s customers may require signed written contracts or the issuance of
written purchase orders to purchase goods or services.
Because, under Topic 606, the form of the contract does not, in and of itself,
determine whether a contract exists (see the discussion on enforceable rights
and obligations in the overview to this chapter, as well as the discussion in
Questions B10–B30); whether the entity is consistent in the form of its
contracts and/or its evidence of approval of those contracts also do not, in
isolation, affect whether a contract exists.



                  Example B40.1
                  Form of the contract and approval does not affect
                  contract conclusion
ABC Corp. is a provider of computer security software. ABC provides time-
based licenses to its customers. ABC has a customary business practice of
executing formal license agreements with its customers, including
amendments for license renewals.
Customer has licensed ABC’s software for the last two years and its current
term license will expire on December 31, 20X0, which is also ABC’s fiscal year-



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        90
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



end. On December 30, 20X0, ABC and Customer (i.e. an authorized officer of
Customer) correspond via email in which Customer requests to renew its
license for an additional two years and ABC quotes Customer a fee of $200,000
for the renewal. The email offer from ABC includes all of the substantive terms
and conditions normally included in ABC’s renewal amendments. Customer
responds via email accepting the offer later on December 30, 20X0, and on
December 31, 20X0, Customer emails ABC a purchase order for the two-year
renewal license at the agreed-upon fee. For various reasons, a written renewal
amendment to the parties’ master license agreement is not executed or signed
by both parties until January 8, 20X1.
A contract may exist as of ABC’s December 31 fiscal year-end. Unlike under
legacy US GAAP, the absence of an executed, written renewal amendment
does not, in isolation, preclude a contract from existing before that amendment
being formally executed.
Depending on various facts and circumstances (e.g. the governing jurisdiction),
either the email accepting ABC’s offer (which occurred on December 30, 20X0)
or the written purchase order (issued on December 31, 20X0) may create
enforceable rights and obligations on the parties as well as permit ABC to
conclude that the contract existence criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 have
been met before executing the formal written amendment.
ABC’s evaluation of whether enforceable rights and obligations exist would
typically include an assessment of its customary business practices and past
experience with what has been enforced in the jurisdiction governing this
contract. Meanwhile, the substance of the email communications (which, in this
case, included all of the substantive terms and conditions normally included in
ABC’s renewal amendments) and the written purchase order would affect
whether the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 are met (e.g. whether the entity
can identify each party’s rights regarding the goods or services to be transferred
and/or the payment terms for the goods or services to be transferred).
Note that even if a contract exists as of ABC’s fiscal year-end, ABC will not
necessarily recognize revenue from the license renewal during its current fiscal
year. ABC will need to consider the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-55-58B
through 55-58C in order to make that determination (see Chapter F – Step 5:
Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation).



                  Question B50
                  Are ‘side agreements’ contracts under Topic 606?



  Side agreements

  Software entities may enter into side agreements with customers outside of
  the normal contracting process (e.g. as part of the negotiation process or in
  response to an actual or perceived customer service issue). Those entities’
  sales and marketing staff may be motivated to make commitments to
  customers (verbally, written or electronically transmitted – e.g. email) that are




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        91
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



  not part of the master arrangement with the customer (often referred to as
  side agreements or side deals) in order to consummate a sale.


Interpretive response: All terms and conditions that create enforceable rights
and obligations need to be considered in evaluating a contract, regardless of
whether the form of some of those terms and conditions (e.g. in an email or
letter agreement, which may be considered a ‘side agreement’) differs from
other terms and conditions in the contract (e.g. those included in a formal
‘master agreement’ or ‘statement of work’). The form in which additional terms
and conditions are agreed generally will not affect whether those terms and
conditions are part of the contract under Topic 606. This is because Topic 606
does not focus on the form of the contract or its approval, but rather on
whether enforceable rights and obligations on the parties are specified and the
parties are committed to meeting their respective obligations.
However, an entity should assess whether the form used to communicate
certain terms and conditions being different from that of the master agreement
(or associated agreements) affects whether the terms and conditions have
been established or change the enforceable rights and obligations to which the
parties are committed. ‘Side agreements’ often occur outside the entity’s
standard contract procedures. Those contract procedures may have been
established by an entity to ensure enforceability of contracts entered into with
its customers.
A particular side agreement may not, in and of itself, create enforceable rights
and obligations on the parties. However, in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-
25-16 and 606-10-32-7, respectively, the side agreement may create a
reasonable expectation on the part of the customer that a promised good or
service will be transferred; a valid expectation that a discount, rebate or some
other form of price concession (including extended payment terms) will be
granted; or even that the terms of the written contract will not be enforced. A
pattern by the entity of providing free or discounted good or services, or
providing subsequent discounts, rebates or extended payments, as a result of
side agreements that are not legally enforceable contracts may create implied
performance obligations, variable consideration and/or significant financing
components that the entity will need to account for in future contracts if they
create a reasonable expectation on the part of those customers that they will
receive those items or price concessions.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, side agreements were particularly troublesome in
software licensing arrangements because of the requirement to have vendor-
specific objective evidence of fair value (VSOE) for each undelivered item in
order to account for delivered items separately from the undelivered items –
that is, in order to recognize revenue for delivered items. If there were
undelivered items for which VSOE was not established, all of the revenue under
the related contract would be deferred, including for delivered items, until VSOE
was established for all remaining undelivered items or until the last item was




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        92
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



delivered (unless the only undelivered item was PCS or hosting services in
which case the total consideration would be recognized ratably over that
service period).
Side agreements were also troublesome because of the relatively punitive
guidance that applied to entities with a history of granting concessions to
customers. A history of granting concessions to customers would call into
question whether the fees in the entity’s arrangements were fixed or
determinable. Revenue under arrangements for these entities was often
significantly deferred, even beyond the point at which cash was received, and
was recognized only once the arrangement consideration was deemed to be
fixed (i.e. the risk of concession had abated).
Topic 606 eliminates the VSOE requirement that previously applied to software
licensing arrangements and substantially changes the effect on a software
entity’s revenue recognition of a pattern of concessions (see Questions C90
and D130). Therefore, the accounting consequences of many side agreements
(e.g. those that grant price or additional good/service concessions) may not be
as significant as under legacy US GAAP. That is, these types of side
agreements may result in the deferral of some of the contract consideration –
for example, for additional, undelivered goods or services or for potential
discounts or rebates – but will typically not result in the deferral of all contract
consideration as frequently occurred under legacy US GAAP due to the VSOE
requirement and the restrictive guidance on concessions.
However, other types of side agreements may still result in an entity not
recognizing any revenue from a contract even as it transfers goods (including
licenses) or services. For example, a side agreement that negates the
customer’s obligation to pay for good or services would generally prohibit
the entity from recognizing any revenue until either one of the events in
paragraph 606-10-32-7 are met or until the entity’s enforceable rights to
consideration are re-established (e.g. through a modification to the side
agreement). Similarly, a side agreement that promises unspecified future
concessions may result in a conclusion that the entity cannot identify each
party’s rights and obligations in the contract, which is a requirement for a
contract to exist in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-1.



                  Question B60
                  Does a contract exist for services such as PCS or
                  SaaS when an entity continues to provide the
                  services after the expiration of the contract with the
                  customer?
Interpretive response: Entities may continue to provide services to a
customer (e.g. PCS, hosting services, or SaaS) after the expiration of the
contract. Whether a contract exists in those circumstances depends on
whether enforceable rights and obligations exist after the expiration of the
previous contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        93
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



Determining whether an enforceable contract exists
Even if there are no provisions in the contract to continue the services after
expiration of the contract and the entity continues to provide the services under
the terms of the expired contract while a new contractual arrangement is being
negotiated, enforceable rights and obligations may still exist and there may be
evidence that both parties are committed to those obligations.
There may be circumstances in which an entity could conclude that there are
legally enforceable rights and obligations even in the absence of a formal
renewal agreement. Judgment may be required to support that both parties are
committed to their respective obligations after the expiration of the written
agreement. Additional evidence might include consideration by the entity of its
past practice of invoicing for the continuation of services subsequent to an
expired agreement and whether its customers, including the present customer
if this situation has previously arisen, have continued to pay (and the
enforceability of those amounts had they not).The entity’s provision of the
services and the customer’s continued payment of the service fees may
provide evidence to demonstrate such commitment. Additionally, an entity
might consider in its evaluation any received customer purchase orders,
whether contract negotiations have begun and/or any email communications
evidencing the customer’s intent to continue the services and pay for such
services. An entity might also consider its history with the customer, and
potentially other similar customers, in terms of whether the customer has
previously continued services after contract expiration and paid for such
services or entered into a contract extension that addressed those services.
Ultimately, evidence of behaviors may not be sufficient to conclude that
enforceable rights and obligations exist and legal interpretation by competent
counsel may be required.
Lastly, the entity would need to conclude that collectibility of amounts due for
the continued services is probable.
If there is an enforceable contract within the scope of the revenue model
Revenue would continue to be recognized as the services are provided based
on the terms and conditions of the contract. If the fees for the services are
uncertain because of ongoing negotiations to enter into a formal agreement, the
entity would be required to estimate the total amount of variable consideration
(subject to the constraint) to which it would be entitled in exchange for
providing the services (for further discussion of variable consideration and the
constraint, see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price). When the
formal agreement is executed, if the fees for the services provided post-
expiration are changed (e.g. the parties agree on a monthly service fee of $100,
while the entity had been invoicing, and the customer paying, $105), this would
either result in an adjustment to the variable consideration included in the
transaction price by the entity or, if the consideration was not deemed to be
variable (e.g. because the entity had no indication that the formal contract
would not codify the monthly services fees it was charging the customer), as a
contract modification (see Chapter G – Contract modifications).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        94
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



If there is not an enforceable contract within the scope of the revenue
model
The entity would first consider the guidance for consideration received before
concluding a contract exists (paragraph 606-10-25-7) to determine if revenue
can be recognized. We believe the conclusion about whether revenue can be
recognized based on that guidance could differ depending on whether the
guidance applies:
a. because enforceable rights and obligations do not exist (i.e. a legally binding
   contract does not exist); or
b. solely because the collectibility criterion is not met.
If there is not a contract within the revenue model because a legally binding
contract does not exist ((a) above), we do not believe any of the criteria (a-c) in
paragraph 606-10-25-7 can be met. That is, in the absence of a legally binding
contract, we do not believe it is possible for the entity to conclude that it has (1)
no remaining obligations to transfer goods or services, (2) received all, or
substantially all, of the consideration promised (the entity does not have an
enforceable promise from the customer to pay any amount of consideration) or
(3) received consideration that is nonrefundable. Item (1) must be met to meet
criteria (a) or (c). Meanwhile, item (2) must be met to meet criterion (a) and item
(3) must be met to meet any of the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-7.


                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Identifying the Contract
25-7 When a contract with a customer does not meet the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-1 and an entity receives consideration from the customer,
the entity shall recognize the consideration received as revenue only when
one or more of the following events have occurred:
a. The entity has no remaining obligations to transfer goods or services to the
   customer, and all, or substantially all, of the consideration promised by the
   customer has been received by the entity and is nonrefundable.
b. The contract has been terminated, and the consideration received from the
   customer is nonrefundable.
c. The entity has transferred control of the goods or services to which the
   consideration that has been received relates, the entity has stopped
   transferring goods or services to the customer (if applicable) and has no
   obligation under the contract to transfer additional goods or services, and
   the consideration received from the customer is nonrefundable.


In contrast, if a legally binding contract exists, but the contract is not within the
scope of the revenue model such that the guidance in paragraph 606-10-25-7
applies solely because the collectibility criterion is not met (b. above), the entity
may be able to conclude on each of the items (1) – (3) outlined in the
preceding paragraph.
For example, if the legally binding contract does not obligate the entity to
provide services beyond either those it has already performed or those for
which the customer has already paid (e.g. the current month’s services paid in



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        95
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



advance), the entity would likely be able to recognize revenue for the services it
has already provided and for which it has received substantially all of the
consideration to which it is legally entitled. That is, in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-7(a), the entity might be able to conclude that it has no
remaining obligation to provide further services (i.e. beyond those already
provided after the previous contract expired) and has received substantially all
of the consideration to which it is entitled for those services such that it can
recognize revenue for the services once those services are complete and
substantially all of the consideration to which it is entitled for those services has
been received.
Regardless of the reason for concluding that there is not an enforceable
contract within the scope of the revenue model, if none of the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-7 are met, the entity would defer any consideration
received from the customer and recognize it as a deposit liability until there is
an enforceable contract within the scope of the revenue model. At that point in
time, the entity would recognize revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis for the
services already provided under the newly established contract and account for
the remainder of the contract in the same manner as any other services
contract within the scope of Topic 606.



                  Example B60.1
                  Contract continuation for PCS
ABC and Customer have a longstanding relationship. The parties’ latest
12-month PCS agreement expired on May 31, 20X3 and did not include any
provision for automatic renewal of the PCS. Customer paid $12,000 upfront for
the 12 months of PCS on June 1, 20X2, which was the observable stand-alone
selling price for the PCS.
A new PCS agreement requiring a fee of $10,800 for the 12-month period of
June 1, 20X3 to May 31, 20X4 is signed on July 31, 20X3. No agreement
existed from June 1, 20X3 until July 31, 20X3, although ABC continued to
provide PCS in anticipation of executing an agreement for the 12-month period
following the expiration of the prior agreement. As per its customary business
practice, ABC invoiced Customer for the June 1, 20X3 through May 31, 20X4
PCS in May 20X3 at the amount that was agreed for the preceding year (i.e.
$12,000). ABC concludes, based on advice of legal counsel, that an enforceable
contract did not exist between June 1, 20X3 and July 31, 20X3.
ABC recognizes its PCS revenue over time using a time-based measure of
progress (see Question F220).
Scenario 1: Customer does not pay initial invoice
Customer did not pay ABC’s $12,000 invoice issued in May 20X3. ABC
canceled that invoice on July 31, 20X3 when the new contract was executed,
and issued a new invoice for the agreed-upon $10,800, which Customer
paid timely.
On July 31, 20X3 ABC recognizes PCS revenue of $1,800, which is equal to two
months of PCS at an annual rate of $10,800, on a cumulative catch-up basis,
that ABC has already provided under the newly established contract. ABC also



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        96
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



recognizes a receivable of $10,800 (Customer pays the $10,800 timely
thereafter) and a contract liability (deferred revenue) of $9,000. ABC will
recognize $900 in PCS revenue per month for the remaining 10 months.
Scenario 2: Customer partially pays the initial invoice
Customer partially paid ($4,000) the $12,000 invoice issued by ABC in May
20X3. When the new contract was concluded on July 31, 20X3, Customer paid
ABC the balance of the $10,800 new contract PCS fee ($10,800 – $4,000
= $6,800).
Despite the fact that Customer partially paid the $12,000 invoice, ABC does not
recognize any revenue until the new agreement is established on July 31, 20X3.
Notwithstanding the fact that services have been provided and cash received
from Customer, ABC is unable to conclude that any of the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-7 are met before the new agreement is entered into.
Therefore, ABC records the $4,000 received from Customer as a deposit
liability. On July 31, 20X3, ABC recognizes $1,800 in PCS revenue consistent
with Scenario 1. However, because of the $4,000 prepayment by Customer, at
July 31, 20X3, ABC only has a receivable of $6,800 (versus $10,800 in
Scenario 1), and has a contract liability of $9,000.
Scenario 3: Customer partially pays, and entity has history of enforcing
payment
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 2 except that ABC concludes an
enforceable contract does exist based on relevant experience with enforcing
similar arrangements and the advice of legal counsel.
Because an enforceable contract exists on June 1, 20X3, ABC continues to
recognize PCS revenue as it provides the PCS to Customer, only at an amount
other than the $1,000 per month it had been recognizing under the previous
PCS contract. Because the transaction price for the PCS it is providing
subsequent to expiration of the prior agreement is uncertain – i.e. ABC knows
from relevant experience that Customer will likely negotiate a lower PCS fee
than the $12,000 in the prior year – ABC is required to estimate the
consideration to which it will be entitled (subject to the constraint on variable
consideration) for providing the PCS during the post-expiration period and
recognize revenue based on that estimate. Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the
transaction price discusses estimating variable consideration, subject to the
constraint, in further detail.
When the new agreement is signed on July 31, 20X3 (assuming, in this
scenario, that ABC is unable to resolve the uncertainty associated with the new
agreement’s transaction price before execution of the new agreement), ABC
will true-up the revenue recognized for the post-expiration period based on
resolution of the uncertainty surrounding the transaction price for the PCS
provided during those periods. For example, if ABC estimated, subject to the
constraint, that it would be entitled to $700 for each of the two post-expiration
months of PCS, on July 31 when the new agreement is signed with a
transaction price for the full year of $10,800 (which equates to $900 per month
for the year June 1, 20X3 through May 31, 20X4), ABC would recognize a
cumulative catch-up revenue adjustment of $400 ($1,800 – $1,400).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        97
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

While in some of the scenarios addressed by Question B60 an entity may
conclude that an enforceable contract exists, under legacy US GAAP, it was
generally not the case that an entity could conclude that persuasive evidence of
an arrangement existed after expiration of the contract period if its customary
business practice was to obtain a signed contract for the extension or renewal
period.
Cumulative catch-up vs prospective
Under legacy US GAAP, no revenue was recognized in post-expiration service
periods if persuasive evidence of an arrangement did not exist and/or the fees
for the services were not fixed or determinable. Once persuasive evidence of
an arrangement had been obtained, and the fees were fixed or determinable,
the PCS fees were recognized prospectively, on a ratable basis, over the
remainder of the new PCS contract term (other than in some scenarios, such as
the reinstatement of PCS, where additional deliverables – e.g. specified updates
or upgrades – had been transferred to the customer during the lapse in
agreement period). For example, in Scenario 1 of Example B60.1, ABC would
have recognized the $10,800 PCS fees in the agreement executed on July 31,
20X3 ratably over the period from August 1, 20X3 through May 31, 20X4
($1,080 per month).
Recognizing revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis, as described in
Question B60 and illustrated in Example B60.1 (in Scenario 1 and Scenario 2), is
a significant change from legacy US GAAP.



                  Question B70
                  Does a fiscal funding clause affect whether a
                  contract exists under Topic 606?

Interpretive response: It depends. Fiscal funding clauses sometimes are found
in software licensing and other (e.g. SaaS) arrangements in which the customers
are governmental units. Such clauses generally provide that the contract is
cancellable if the legislature or funding authority does not appropriate the funds
necessary for the governmental unit to fulfill its obligations under the contract.
A funding contingency, from a business enterprise or governmental unit, may
render the agreement to not be an enforceable contract under applicable laws
and/or regulations if the chance of the fiscal funding contingency being
triggered is more than remote. Judgment will need to be applied in those
contracts to determine whether a contract exists before funding has been
approved – i.e. whether the contract existence criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1
are met.
Even if a contract is determined to exist in an arrangement with a fiscal funding
clause, a fiscal funding clause that has a more than remote chance of being
triggered may affect the enforceable contract term. This is because, in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-3, an entity applies the guidance in



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        98
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



Topic 606 to the duration of the contract (i.e. the contractual period) for which
the parties to the contract have present enforceable rights and obligations, and
such rights may not presently exist beyond the existing fiscal authorization (i.e.
the customer has the right to unilaterally terminate services without penalty by
not approving funding). For example, an agreement may be for a stated three-
year period, but if the entity’s enforceable right to payment for providing the
services in years 2 and 3 is contingent on the customer obtaining fiscal
authorization (i.e. the customer may cancel the contract if the legislature or
funding authority does not authorize the expenditure), an enforceable contract
may only exist for one year. In that scenario, the contract term under Topic 606
would only be the one-year period covered by the current funding commitment
and any period beyond that would be considered cancellable by the customer.
An alternative view exists that we believe is also acceptable when the
customer is a governmental unit and a contract otherwise exists in accordance
with paragraph 606-10-25-1. Under that view, the unfunded portion of the
contract, even if the chance of the fiscal funding contingency being triggered is
more than remote, should be considered variable consideration; the software
entity includes variable consideration in the transaction price subject to the
constraint (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price).
Whichever view an entity ascribes to we would expect it to be applied
consistently to similar arrangements.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, the existence of a fiscal funding clause in a software
arrangement with a governmental unit necessitated an assessment of the
likelihood of cancellation through exercise of the fiscal funding clause.
If the likelihood of exercise of the fiscal funding clause with a governmental unit
was assessed as being remote (i.e. the chance of the future event or events
occurring is slight), the software arrangement would be considered non-
cancellable and, thus, revenue would be recognized if the other revenue
recognition criteria were met. If the likelihood of exercise was assessed as
other than remote, the license was considered cancellable, thus precluding
revenue recognition until the funding was authorized or the contingency
became remote.
A fiscal funding clause with a customer other than a governmental unit created
a contingency that precluded revenue recognition until the requirements of the
clause were met.
For software entities that ascribe to the first view outlined in the question, we
do not expect that the effect of a fiscal funding clause will be substantially
different under Topic 606 than it was under legacy US GAAP. However, the
variable consideration approach to the unfunded portion of the contract will be a
significant change in how fiscal funding clauses are considered for those
entities that apply that alternative to governmental contracts.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        99
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




Collectibility

                  Question B80
                  What factors should an entity consider in
                  determining whether the amount of consideration
                  to which an entity expects to be entitled includes
                  an implicit price concession?
Interpretive response: The collectibility criterion is applied to the amount to
which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for the goods and services
that ‘will be transferred to the customer’. That amount may not be the stated
contract price for those goods or services that will be transferred to the
customer. The amount of consideration to which the entity expects to be
entitled considers whether the promised consideration is variable (i.e. is
different from the stated contract price) due to facts and circumstances that, at
contract inception, indicate the entity may offer a price concession to the
customer. It may be difficult to distinguish between situations in which there is
a significant risk the customer will not pay the promised consideration for the
goods and services that will be transferred to the customer (i.e. a collectibility
issue) and situations in which the entity will accept an amount of consideration
that is less than the promised amount in return for those goods and services
(i.e. an implicit price concession).
Topic 606, including the two examples of implicit price concessions (Examples 2
and 3 in paragraphs 606-10-55-99 through 55-105), does not provide any explicit
guidance about how to determine if an entity may grant an implicit price
concession. However, the Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC192) states
that an entity’s customary business practices, published policies or specific
statements may provide evidence and/or create a valid expectation on the part of
the customer that the entity is willing to accept a lower price in exchange for the
promised goods and services. BC192 also indicates that price concessions may
be more likely to be granted in situations where doing so would enhance a
customer relationship or encourage future sales.
The Boards decided against providing further guidance on implicit price
concessions. However, the FASB and IASB staffs proposed some additional
factors that would, to varying degrees (i.e. in some cases, the factors may
merely contribute to a price concession conclusion rather than provide
determinative evidence in that respect), indicate that, at the time of entering
into a contract, an entity intends to offer a price concession if there is a
significant risk that the customer will not pay the promised consideration for the
goods and services that will be transferred. While these factors are not
authoritative because they were not included in Topic 606, we believe they may
be useful for software entities to consider in the absence of authoritative
guidance. These factors along with our view on how those factors might relate
to software entities are as follows.
a. The goods or services promised to the customer are not expected to
   expose the entity to a significant economic loss if the customer does not
   pay the promised consideration. For example, an entity would not be




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        100
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



      expected to incur a significant economic loss in any of the following
      circumstances:
      i.      The incremental costs that an entity incurs to produce the good or
              service or transfer it to the customer would be negligible – This
              circumstance may frequently arise in software licensing arrangements
              because the incremental costs to transfer a software license are
              typically negligible. It may also frequently be the case that the
              incremental costs of providing PCS services or SaaS to a customer in a
              multi-tenant SaaS environment are minor.
     ii.      The entity can deny the customer further access to the promised good
              or service if the customer fails to meet its obligations under the
              contract – This is typically the case in SaaS arrangements, but may
              also be the case in some software licensing arrangements if the entity
              only provides temporary software keys or has the ability to send out a
              ‘kill’ code if the customer does not pay the license fees.
    iii.      The good that transfers to the customer is not expected to depreciate
              substantially (or diminish in value) and, therefore, the good provides
              the entity with sufficient collateral in the event of the customer failing
              to meet its obligations under the contract. For example, the good is a
              tangible asset that is not expected to have depreciated substantially if
              and when the entity obtains control of the good from the customer –
              This circumstance would not typically be the case in software or SaaS
              arrangements.
b. The entity has previously chosen not to enforce its rights to the promised
   consideration in similar contracts with the customer (or class of customer)
   under similar circumstances – Evidence that the entity has previously
   accepted consideration less than the promised amount in similar contracts
   may call into question whether the entity will accept consideration less than
   the promised amount in this contract.
c. The entity has experience (or other evidence) about the customer not
   fulfilling its obligations to pay the promised consideration in other contracts
   – If the entity has history of the customer not paying some or all of the
   promised consideration in prior contracts, the entity’s willingness to enter
   into new contracts with the customer despite that history may suggest it
   will accept a partial payment as complete performance by the customer.
d. The entity has experience (or other evidence) about the class of customer
   to which the customer belongs not fulfilling their obligations to pay the
   promised consideration in similar contracts under similar circumstances –
   Similar to c. the entity’s willingness to enter into a contract with a customer
   in a ‘suspect’ class – i.e. a class of customer where there is a significant
   credit risk – may suggest the entity will accept a partial payment as
   complete performance by the customer.
Variable consideration and price concessions are discussed in Chapter D –
Step 3: Determine the transaction price.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        101
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Example B80.1
                  Collectibility threshold assessed based on amount
                  the entity expects to receive for the goods or
                  services transferred
ABC Corp. enters into an arrangement with Customer to license 1,000 seats of
Product X for two years for $1,000,000. ABC’s standard payment terms for
similar customers entering into similar licenses are for Customer to make two
equal payments, one due at contract inception and the second due at the
beginning of Year 2 of the license.
ABC has a prior history with Customer. Customer has a history with ABC of
requesting a reduction in the second payment due, which ABC has frequently
granted in order to incent Customer to make additional purchases, including
renewals, in the future. ABC further notes that this practice is not isolated to
Customer; other similar high-volume customers have made similar requests
that ABC has granted.
Based on all relevant facts and circumstances, ABC assesses that it is likely to
accept an amount of consideration that is less than the $1,000,000 promised
amount. In this contract, after consideration of the guidance on variable
consideration in paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through 32-13 (see further discussion
of this in Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price), ABC concludes
that the amount of consideration to which it expects to be entitled is $900,000.
Accordingly, when assessing whether collectibility is probable, ABC assesses
whether it is probable that it will receive $900,000 – i.e. the amount to which it
expects to be entitled after the expected price concession.
See also Example B100.1, Scenario 2.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP for software entities, collectibility was assessed against
the fixed or determinable fees in the arrangement in their entirety – i.e. there
was no concept of considering whether collectibility was probable only for a
portion of the fixed or determinable fees.
In contrast, collectibility under Topic 606 may be assessed against an amount
that is less than that promised in the contract either (1) because of an implied
price concession or (2) because the goods or services that ‘will be transferred
to the customer’ (see Questions B90 and B110) differ from the promised goods
or services in the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        102
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                   Question B85
                   How is ‘substantially all’ defined for the
                   collectibility assessment?
Interpretive response: ‘Substantially all’ is not defined in Topic 606. In
ASU 2016-12, the FASB amended the collectibility criterion so that it is met if
‘substantially all’ of the consideration to which the entity will be entitled is
collectible rather than ‘all’ of the consideration. The FASB decided that a
contract could represent a substantive transaction even if it is not probable the
entity will collect 100% of the consideration to which it expects to be entitled.
[ASU 2016-12.BC12]

The term ‘substantially all’ is used in other places in US GAAP – e.g. Topic 842
(leases) – and generally understood to mean approximately 90%. For example,
Topic 842 provides guidance that 90% might be appropriate for evaluating
‘substantially all’. We believe 90% should not be viewed as a safe harbor or
bright-line and entities should consider all relevant facts and circumstances
about the customer and the transaction. [842-10-55-2]



                  Question B90
                  In assessing collectibility, an entity considers only
                  the likelihood of payment for goods or services that
                  ‘will be transferred to the customer’. What does this
                  mean in the context of typical software related
                  service arrangements (e.g. SaaS arrangements or
                  PCS services sold separately from a software
                  license)?
Interpretive response: Topic 606 provides that when an entity has the ability –
i.e. both the right and the capability – and the intent (typically, evidenced by its
customary business practices) to stop providing services in the event of
customer non-payment, the entity does not have credit risk with respect to
those services it would not be required to provide. It is for this reason that
Topic 606 requires an entity to consider only the collectibility of the promised
consideration in the contract (i.e. its exposure to credit risk) for the goods or
services that the entity will transfer to the customer before it would be able to
stop providing further goods or services in the event of customer non-payment.
Example 1, Cases B through D, in Topic 606 demonstrate application of this
concept to service contracts.
In Cases B and C, even though the contract includes a promise by the entity to
provide three years of services, for which the customer pays monthly fees in
arrears, the entity has the ability and intent to stop providing the promised
services in the event of customer non-payment. Therefore, the services that
‘will be transferred to the customer’ include only those services that the entity
will provide before it follows its customary business practice to stop services
to the customer. While not specifically illustrated in either Case, this might
mean the services that ‘will be transferred to the customer’ are only one or
two months’ of service or some longer period, depending on the entity’s



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        103
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



customary business practice with respect to how long it permits a non-paying
customer to continue receiving services.
In Case D, the illustrated scenario is a one-year gym membership, but the
contract requires advance payment each month by the customer and services
(i.e. access to the gym) are not provided for any given month if the advance
payment has not been received. Consequently, in Case D, the services that will
be provided to the customer are only the one month of services for which the
customer has prepaid.
There may be circumstances where the entity does not have either the ability to
stop providing services to the customer or the demonstrated intent to do so, in
which case the collectibility criterion is assessed against the promised
consideration for all of the promised services in the contract. For example,
an entity:
— may not have the right to stop providing promised services in the event of
  customer bankruptcy because bankruptcy rules in some jurisdictions
  require service providers to continue providing services that are essential to
  the customer while it undergoes restructuring;
— may not be able to discontinue a service, such as a transportation service
  because the transportation asset (e.g. a ship) cannot for practical reasons
  dump the cargo into the sea and the ship is needed at the port of call in any
  event in order to fulfill the entity’s next contract; or
— may have demonstrated its intent not to discontinue services in a timely
  manner in the event of customer non-payment. Particularly if the
  incremental costs of providing services to the customer are minor, an entity
  may continue providing services and merely intend to pursue collection at a
  later point. A circumstance of this nature however may strongly indicate a
  likely price concession (see Question B80).
When an entity does conclude that it has the ability and the intent to
discontinue services in the event of customer non-payment, how long the
entity’s customary business practices (or other evidence of the entity’s intent)
indicate that the entity will continue to provide services to a non-paying
customer may influence whether the collectibility criterion is met for that
contract (see Question B100).
Collectibility will generally not be a concern in service arrangements that are
prepaid. For example, if the customer is required to prepay for all of the
promised services in the contract (e.g. prepay for a three-year SaaS
arrangement), then the ‘will be transferred’ notion will not apply.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, collectibility was assessed against the entire fixed or
determinable fees in the contract. When collectibility of the arrangement was
not reasonably assured, revenue was generally recognized on a cash basis
when the other recognition criteria had been met.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        104
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



There is no mechanism whereby an entity concludes collectibility is probable (or
reasonably assured for non-software licensing arrangements, such as SaaS
arrangements) based on a partial assessment of the fixed or determinable fees,
such as occurs under Topic 606 when the entity concludes there is a likely price
concession (see Question B80) or that the goods or services that ‘will be
transferred to the customer’ are not the promised goods or services in the
contract. As a result, entities may more frequently pass the collectibility
threshold in Topic 606 than they did the collectibility threshold under legacy
US GAAP.
Further, as discussed in Question B125, under Topic 606 cash basis recognition
is not the default accounting when collectibility is not probable but an entity has
transferred control of the related good or service.



                  Question B100
                  Does an entity’s ability and intent to stop providing
                  goods or services automatically mean that the
                  collectibility criterion will be met?
Interpretive response: No. The collectibility criterion is met only when it is
probable that the entity will collect substantially all of the consideration to which
it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred
to the customer. If (1) it is not probable the entity will collect any consideration
from the customer or (2) the entity does not have the ability or the
demonstrated intent to discontinue services in a timely manner after the
customer stops paying for the entity’s services, the entity may not be able to
conclude that it is probable it will collect substantially all of the consideration to
which it is entitled for the goods or services it will provide. Consider the
following examples:
— Consistent with Example 1, Case C of Topic 606, if an entity has the ability
  and the intent to timely discontinue services but it is not probable it will
  collect substantially all of the promised consideration for any services it
  would provide before it discontinues services, the arrangement is not a
  genuine and substantive transaction (see paragraph 606-10-55-3A and
  paragraph BC12 of ASU 2016-12).
— Assume an entity concludes it is probable a customer will pay for the first
  12 months of service in a 36-month contract, but that collectibility of the
  remainder of the fees is not probable. If the entity does not have the ability
  or the intent to discontinue services for a number of months (e.g. four
  months) after a customer stops paying for those services, the entity may
  conclude that it is not probable that it will collect substantially all of the
  consideration to which it will be entitled for the services that will be
  provided to the customer. For example, assume the monthly service fee is
  $100 and the entity ‘will’ provide 16 months of service, for which the
  promised consideration is $1,600. However, it is only probable that the
  entity will collect $1,200 ($100/month × 12 months). In that case, it is not
  probable the entity will collect substantially all of the promised
  consideration for the services it ‘will’ provide to the customer unless the
  entity concludes that the $1,200 it expects to collect is also the amount to



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        105
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



      which it expects to be entitled (i.e. it expects to grant a price concession to
      the customer – see next paragraph).
In either of the above cases, the entity would account for the contract using the
alternative model in paragraph 606-10-25-7 until either (1) one of the events in
paragraphs 606-10-25-7 occur or (2) collectibility of a sufficient portion – that is,
substantially all – of the promised consideration for the services that will be
provided becomes probable. However, in the latter case, it may be that the
entity is implicitly willing to accept an amount of consideration that is less than
the promised amount (i.e. the entity will grant an implicit price concession) even
if the entity pursues collection of all amounts owed – see Question B80 for
additional discussion of implicit price concessions. If that is the case, the entity
may conclude it is probable that it will collect the reduced amount to which it
expects to be entitled ($1,200 in the preceding bullet) and that, therefore, the
collectibility criterion is met.



                  Example B100.1
                  Assessment of collectibility for low credit quality
                  new customer
ABC Corp. enters into a non-cancellable 36-month contract to provide SaaS to
Customer. Customer is a new customer of low credit quality. The consideration
promised in the contract is $3,600, with $100 payable in advance each month.
ABC has substantive history with this class of customer, based on which ABC
concludes it is not probable the customer will pay all of the promised
consideration for the promised 36 months of SaaS. However, based on its
experience with similar customers, ABC expects Customer to make the
payments required under the contract for at least 10 months. If a customer
stops making the required payments (i.e. is in material breach of the contract),
ABC has the right to deny that customer further access to the SaaS and ABC’s
customary business practice is to mitigate its credit risk by doing so. In the
event of customer default, ABC always pursues collection for unpaid services
such that no explicit price concession by ABC is expected.
Scenario 1: Discontinuation of services at the end of the month
ABC’s customary business practice is to discontinue services by the end of the
month for which a customer has not paid. For example, if a customer pays in
advance for May, but does not pay for June, ABC typically discontinues services
by the end of June. ABC vigorously pursues collection from all its customers
and typically is successful in recovering some portion of the fees for which the
customer has not paid.
ABC concludes it is probable it will collect substantially all of the consideration
to which it is entitled in exchange for services that will be provided to
Customer. This is because ABC expects to collect all of the promised
consideration in the contract for at least 10 months of service and, if Customer
defaults, some portion of the fees to which it would be entitled for whatever
month of service after that Customer does not pay.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        106
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



Scenario 2: Discontinuation of service after 5 months
ABC’s customary business practice is to discontinue services only after a
customer has not paid for the service for five months. For example, if a
customer pays in advance for May, but does not pay for June – October, ABC
typically discontinues services by the end of October. ABC only discontinues
services in this timeframe because its incremental costs to provide the services
is minor and, even if it cannot recover the entire contracted fees for the unpaid
months, it pursues collection vigorously and will usually recover a portion of
those fees that is sufficient to cover its costs of providing the SaaS and an
acceptable profit margin. That portion of the promised fees, however, is a minor
portion of the promised consideration.
ABC concludes that a substantive contract exists because it will provide
services to Customer for a significant period of time and expects to recover
consideration that will provide a reasonable profit margin on the contract. ABC’s
experience with this class of customer and its history of providing services well
after a customer has defaulted on its payments suggests ABC is implicitly
willing to accept a lower fee than that stated in the contract with Customer. As
a result, Customer concludes it is probable that it will collect substantially all of
the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for the services that
will be provided to Customer. However, the transaction price includes variable
consideration that ABC must estimate subject to the variable consideration
constraint (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price) such that
ABC will not recognize revenue of $100/month at least during the earlier part of
the contract period.



                  Question B110
                  How are software licenses considered when
                  determining the ‘goods or services that will be
                  transferred to the customer’?
Interpretive response: Software licenses are goods transferred at a point in
time (see Questions F10 and F20). They are not services satisfied over the
license period, even if the entity has the legal right to revoke that right of use
and/or has the ability to send out a ‘kill code’ or similar in the event of customer
non-payment.
Therefore, revoking a customer’s right to use the entity’s software is a
repossession of the software license (i.e. repossession of a good); it is not
equivalent to shutting off a service in response to a customer’s failure to pay for
services already provided. Paragraph 606-10-55-3C states: “An entity’s ability to
repossess an asset transferred to a customer should not be considered for the
purpose of assessing the entity’s ability to mitigate its exposure to credit risk.”
Consequently, the ability to revoke a customer’s right to use the entity’s
software in the event of non-payment of software license fees being paid over
time is not considered in assessing whether collectibility of the consideration to
which the entity will be entitled for the software license is probable.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        107
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



If the software license is part of a combined performance obligation
In some circumstances under Topic 606, a software license will not be distinct
from other goods or services and, therefore, will be part of a combined
performance obligation. Example 10 (Case C), Example 11 (Case B) and
Example 55 of Topic 606 illustrate examples of a license that is part of a
combined performance obligation together with associated updates or services.
Each of those examples illustrates that the entity determines the nature of the
combined item in evaluating whether the performance obligation is satisfied
over time or at a point in time and in determining the appropriate measure of
progress to apply to that performance obligation if it is satisfied over time.
Similarly, we believe the entity would consider the nature of the combined item
that includes the license in determining whether the entity would be able to
stop transferring that good or service in response to customer non-payment,
and that this would mean the following for each of the three combined license
and updates or services examples in Topic 606:
— Example 10 (Case C) – Because the combined good or service is the
  provision of anti-virus protection to the customer for three years (see
  paragraph 606-10-55-140F), if the entity has the ability and the intent to stop
  providing anti-virus protection – i.e. revoke the customer’s right to use the
  anti-virus software and stop providing future updates – the ‘goods or
  services that will be transferred to the customer’ may be less than the
  three years of anti-virus protection promised in the contract.
— Example 55 – Because the combined good or service is ‘ongoing access’
  to the entity’s continually changing intellectual property for three years (see
  paragraph 606-10-55-365A), if the entity has the ability and the intent to
  stop providing ‘access’ to its intellectual property – i.e. revoke the
  customer’s right to use the intellectual property and stop providing future
  updates/upgrades – the ‘goods or services that will be transferred to the
  customer’ may be less than the three years’ access promised in the
  contract.
— Example 11 (Case B) – The combined good or service is the software
  customization, which uses the base software and the entity’s customization
  services as inputs to produce customized software as the output (see
  paragraph 606-10-55-149). If the entity has the ability and the intent to stop
  performing the software customization – i.e. revoke the customer’s right to
  use the base software and stop the customization services – the ‘goods or
  services that will be transferred to the customer’ may be different from the
  intended combined output in the contract (i.e. the customized software).
      Note: The discussion in this bullet ignores the technical support and the
      software updates in the example, which are each determined to be distinct
      and would be considered in the same manner as any other over-time
      performance obligation for purposes of determining the ‘goods or services
      that will be transferred to the customer’.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        108
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Example B110.1
                  Credit risk is not mitigated for a software license
                  and PCS
ABC Corp. enters into a contract to license its software to Customer along with
technical support and unspecified update, upgrade and enhancement rights
(collectively, PCS) for three years. Customer is of low credit quality.
Despite Customer’s credit rating, the contract fees are $100 per year, payable
at the beginning of each year. Therefore, the transaction price is $300 (for ease
of illustration, this example ignores any potential significant financing
component that may result from paying for the software license over a
three-year period). The stand-alone selling price of the software license is $180
and the stand-alone selling price of the PCS (the PCS is determined to be a
single performance obligation – see Question C150) is $120 for the three-year
period. Both parties are subject to termination penalties if the contract is
canceled. The termination penalty is considered to be substantive.
In assessing whether the contract with Customer meets the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-1, ABC assesses whether it is probable that it will collect
substantially all of the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for
the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer. This includes
assessing ABC’s history with Customer’s class of customer and its business
practice of stopping PCS services within a reasonable period of time in
response to a customer’s nonpayment in accordance with paragraph 606-10-
55-3C.
At contract inception, ABC concludes that the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-
1(e) is not met because it is not probable that Customer will pay substantially all
of the consideration to which the entity will be entitled under the contract for
the software license and PCS services that will be transferred to the customer.
ABC concludes that not only is there a risk that the customer will not pay for
the license and PCS services received from ABC, but also there is a risk that
ABC will never receive any payment for any PCS services provided (considering
the stand-alone selling price of the services is $40 per year). Subsequently,
when Customer initially pays $100, ABC accounts for the consideration
received as a deposit liability in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-7
through 25-8. ABC concludes that none of the events in paragraph 606-10-25-7
have occurred because the contract has not been terminated, the entity has not
received substantially all of the consideration promised in the contract (i.e.
ABC has received only $100 of $300), and ABC is continuing to provide services
to Customer.
Assume that in year 2, ABC continues to conclude that the collectibility criterion
has not been met. Customer’s credit rating remains poor and even though $200
has now been collected, on a stand-alone selling price basis ABC has provided
$220 worth of goods and services (3-year license and one year of PCS) and will
provide another $40 worth of PCS before it can contractually terminate PCS if
Customer does not pay the Year 3 fees of $100. Therefore, it is not yet
probable Customer will pay at least substantially all of the promised




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                             109
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



consideration to which ABC is entitled for the license and PCS it will provide to
Customer. Therefore, the additional $100 paid by the customer at the beginning
of year 2 is, like the payment for Year 1, recorded as a deposit liability, resulting
in a $200 cumulative deposit liability.
In year 3, ABC receives the remaining $100 payment from Customer B. At this
point in time, none of the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-7 have been met.
However, ABC concludes that the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-1(e) is now
met because it is probable that the customer will pay substantially all of the
consideration to which ABC will be entitled for the goods and services. In other
words, once the final advance payment is made ($100) at the beginning of
year 3, ABC concludes that it is probable that it will receive all of the
consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for the license and all
three years of PCS services that are transferred to Customer.
Once the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 are met in year 3, ABC applies the
remaining guidance in Topic 606 to recognize revenue and the following journal
entry is recorded.

                                                                                                    Debit               Credit
  Deposit liability                                                                                    200
  Cash                                                                                                 100
  License revenue                                                                                                           180
  PCS revenue                                                                                                                   80
  Contract liability (deferred revenue)                                                                                         40




                   Question B115
                   How should a software vendor assess collectibility
                   for a portfolio of contracts?
Interpretive response: The TRG agreed that collectibility should be assessed at
the individual contract level – i.e. the individual contract is the unit of account.
[TRG Agenda Paper No. 13]

For example, assume that an entity has 1,000 similar contracts and historical
experience indicates that the entity will not collect on 2% of these contracts.
This does not mean that the collectibility criterion is not met for 2% of the
contracts. Rather, the entity evaluates whether collection is probable for an
individual contract based on its customary procedures performed prior to
entering into the arrangement to determine the credit risk associated with the
individual customer. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 13]
If this evaluation indicates that collectibility is probable, the entity accounts for
the contract under Topic 606. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 13]
However, in some situations, an entity may use a portfolio of historical data to
estimate the amounts that it expects to collect. This type of analysis may be
appropriate when an entity has a high volume of homogeneous transactions.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        110
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



These estimates are then used as an input into the overall assessment of
collectibility for a specific contract.
For example, if on average a software vendor collects 60% of amounts billed
for a homogeneous class of customer transactions and does not intend to offer
a price concession, this may be an indicator that collection of the full contract
amount for a contract with a customer in that class is not probable. Therefore,
the collectibility criterion may not be met for that contract.
Conversely, if on average a software vendor collects 90% of amounts billed for
a homogeneous class of contracts with customers, then this may indicate that
collection of the full contract amount for a contract with a customer in that class
is probable. In that case, the collectibility criterion may be met.
However, if the average collections were 90% because the software vendor
generally collected only 90% from each individual contract, this may indicate
that the vendor has granted a 10% price concession to its customer. For a
discussion of the differentiation between collectibility and a price concession
see Question B80.



                  Question B120
                  Do extended payment terms affect the evaluation of
                  the collectibility criterion?

Interpretive response: Extended payment terms, which would include
situations in which an entity pays for a distinct license through equal payments
for the license and PCS over an extended period (e.g. three years), do not in and
of themselves affect whether the collectibility criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-
1(e) is met. However, they will likely factor into the entity’s assessment of the
credit risk to which it is subject as a result of the contract. That is, extended
payment terms introduce credit risk as a consideration about the customer’s
ability or intention to pay the consideration to which the entity is entitled for the
goods and services that ‘will be transferred to the customer’ where no such
question would exist if the customer were required to pay for the goods or
services as transferred or under non-extended payment terms.
As discussed further in Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price,
extended payment terms may indicate either or both that:
— there is the risk of a future price concession, which would result in a
  conclusion that the transaction price is variable. In that case, the entity
  would need to consider whether it expects to provide a concession, and the
  transaction price would be subject to Topic 606’s constraint on variable
  consideration;
— a significant financing component exists in the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        111
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP applicable to software licensing arrangements,
extended payment terms do not affect whether persuasive evidence of an
arrangement exists. Rather, the arrangement fee is presumed not to be fixed or
determinable if payment of a signification portion of the license fee is not due
until after expiration of the license, or more than 12 months after delivery of the
licensed software. As such, revenue is generally not recognized until the
payments become due and payable.
The fact that the collectibility of extended payments affects whether a contract
exists for purposes of applying Topic 606 is a change from legacy US GAAP. In
addition, the fact that extended payment terms may affect the measurement of
revenue (i.e. if there is determined to be variable consideration or a significant
financing component in the contract), but not the timing of revenue recognition,
is a substantial change from legacy US GAAP.



                  Question B125
                  Can revenue be recognized on a cash basis when
                  the collectibility criterion is not met and the entity
                  continues to provide goods or services to the
                  customer?
Interpretive response: No. If the collectibility criterion is not met, an entity
continuing to provide goods or services to the customer cannot record revenue
based on its collections unless the alternative model criteria in paragraph 606-
10-25-7 are met (see decision tree at the beginning of this chapter). Under the
alternative model, an entity cannot recognize revenue when it has a remaining
obligation to transfer goods or services to a customer or it chooses to continue
to transfer goods or services to a customer when substantially all of the
consideration to which it is legally entitled has not been received.
There are limited scenarios in which an entity can continue to transfer goods or
services under a contract, determine collectibility is not probable, but
nevertheless recognize some revenue. This is because the collectibility criterion
is evaluated based only on the goods or services expected to be transferred.
See Questions B90 and B100 for the evaluation of arrangements where an
entity has the ability and intent to stop providing the promised goods or
services due to customer non-payment.



                   Question B126
                   When does an entity reassess the collectibility
                   criterion?
Interpretive response: Once an entity determines that a contract exists under
Step 1 of the revenue model (including assessing the collectibility criterion), it




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        112
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



does not reassess the collectibility criterion unless there is a significant change
in facts and circumstances that results in a significant deterioration in the
customer’s creditworthiness. For example, a significant deterioration in a
customer’s ability to pay because it lost one of its customers that accounts for
75% of its annual sales would likely lead to a reassessment. [606-10-25-5]
The determination of whether there is a significant deterioration in the
customer’s creditworthiness will be situation-specific and will often be a matter
of judgment. The evaluation is not intended to capture:
— changes of a more minor nature that do not call into question the existence
  of the contract; or
— changing circumstances that might reasonably fluctuate during the contract
  term (especially for a long-term contract) that do not have a significant
  effect. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 13]
If, after a significant change in facts and circumstances, the entity determines
that collectibility is no longer probable, it discontinues using the general revenue
model and follows the guidance on accounting for consideration received when
a contract does not exist – the alternative model in paragraph 606-10-25-7 (see
Question B125). However, the entity does not reverse revenue previously
recognized.
If an entity determines that a contract does not exist under Step 1 of the
revenue model, it continually reassesses the arrangement. If the criteria for
Step 1 are subsequently met, the entity begins applying the revenue model to
the arrangement.



                   Example B126.1
                   Cash received when collectibility criterion is not met
ABC Corp. provides Customer with three years of access to its networking
platform in exchange for monthly payments of $10,000. In January of Year 2 of
the contract, Customer experiences a significant decline in its business and has
difficulty meeting its financial commitments.
ABC agrees to extended payment terms that allow Customer to make
nonrefundable payments of $2,000 per month during Year 2, with the remaining
amounts due in Year 3. The contract is not terminated, ABC continues to
provide Customer with access to its platform and intends to enforce payment
for remaining amounts in Year 3. ABC performs a reassessment of the contract
existence criteria and determines that collectibility of the remaining
consideration to which it expects to be entitled is not probable.
ABC receives $15,000 in partial payments in Year 2. Because the collectibility
criterion was not met upon reassessment, ABC must evaluate the alternative
model criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-7 to determine how to recognize revenue
for the $15,000 nonrefundable payment received.
— The first criterion is not met because Customer has not remitted
  substantially all of the consideration promised for the services provided.
— The second criterion is not met because the contract has not been
  terminated.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        113
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



— The third criterion is not met because ABC has not stopped transferring
  services to Customer.
Based on the evaluation of the alternative model criteria, ABC cannot recognize
revenue for the cash received from Customer in Year 2. Therefore, even though
ABC received $15,000 in cash consideration, ABC recognizes a deposit liability
for $15,000 and records no related revenue.
Note: If the contract existence criteria (including the collectibility criterion) or
one of the criteria in the alternative model is met upon reassessment in Year 3,
ABC would record a cumulative catch-up to revenue for the services already
provided.



                   Question B127
                   Is a receivable recognized if the collectibility
                   criterion is not met?
Interpretive response: No. When an entity concludes that a contract does not
exist because the collectibility criterion is not met (or because any of the other
contract existence criteria are not met), an entity does not record a receivable
for consideration that it has not yet received for the goods or services it has
already transferred to the customer.
This is consistent with the premise in Topic 606 that when collection is not
probable the contract is not substantive and therefore the legal right to
consideration is also not substantive for accounting purposes. [606-10-25-2]


Term of the contract

                  Question B130
                  What is the contract term in a period-to-period (e.g.
                  month-to-month or year-to-year) contract that (a)
                  may be canceled by either party or (b) may be
                  canceled by the customer only?


                  Excerpt from ASU 2014-09

BC50. The Boards decided that Topic 606 should not apply to wholly
unperformed contracts if each party to the contract has the unilateral
enforceable right to terminate the contract without penalty. Those contracts
would not affect an entity’s financial position or performance until either party
performs. In contrast, there could be an effect on an entity’s financial position
and performance if only one party could terminate a wholly unperformed
contract without penalty. For instance, if only the customer could terminate the
wholly unperformed contract without penalty, the entity is obliged to stand
ready to perform at the discretion of the customer. Similarly, if only the entity



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        114
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



could terminate the wholly unperformed contract without penalty, it has an
enforceable right to payment from the customer if it chooses to perform.
BC391. A renewal option gives a customer the right to acquire additional goods
or services of the same type as those supplied under an existing contract. This
type of option could be described as a renewal option within a relatively short
contract (for example, a one-year contract with an option to renew that
contract for a further year at the end of the first and second years) or a
cancellation option within a longer contract (for example, a three-year contract
that allows the customer to discontinue the contract at the end of each year). A
renewal option could be viewed similarly to other options to provide additional
goods or services. In other words, the renewal option could be a performance
obligation in the contract if it provides the customer with a material right that it
otherwise could not obtain without entering into that contract.

Interpretive response: A contract under which services are provided period-to-
period (e.g. month-to-month or year-to-year) unless canceled by either party,
and for which no penalty must be paid for cancellation (i.e. other than paying
amounts due as a result of goods or services already transferred up to the
termination date), is no different from a similar contract structured to require
the parties to actively elect to renew the contract each period (e.g. place a new
order, sign a new contract). This is regardless of whether both entities may
cancel the contract or solely the customer. Consequently, an entity does not
assume a contract period that extends beyond the then-current period. This is
the case regardless of whether the contract has a stated contract period (e.g. a
two-year stated term, but either entity can cancel the contract at the end of any
month during that period for no penalty).
When both parties to the contract have the unilateral right to terminate the
contract at the end of any designated period, a contract does not exist for
periods beyond the then-current period in accordance with paragraph 606-10-
25-4. Only upon commencement of the next service period, whereby
enforceable rights and obligations exist for both parties until the next available
termination date (i.e. the end of that period), does a contract for that period
exist under Topic 606.
When the customer only has a unilateral option to terminate a period-to-period
contract, some enforceable rights and obligations continue to exist. That is, the
customer has the unilateral right to continue to receive services and the entity
an obligation to stand-ready to provide those services if elected by the
customer for an optional period. However, because those services are optional
to the customer, unless they provide the customer with a material right, there is
no accounting by the entity for the customer option. The entity only accounts
for the current period’s services, which are not subject to cancellation, until the
customer elects its option to obtain services for the next period (which includes
by not canceling the services), creating additional enforceable rights and
obligations for the entity – i.e. the customer’s decision not to cancel the
services creates an enforceable obligation on the entity to provide the services
and an enforceable right to receive payment for those services.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        115
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Example B130.1
                  Contract with unspecified term cancellable by either
                  party
ABC Corp. contracts with Customer to provide its SaaS offering for a flat fee of
$130 per month, subject to annual increases based on the lesser of 5% or
changes in the consumer price index (CPI). $130 is the stand-alone selling price of
SaaS at contract inception. The contract term is indefinite and it is cancellable at
the end of each month by either party without penalty.
ABC determines that the initial contract term is only one month and that the
contract term will always be one month under this arrangement. This is
because each subsequent month represents a wholly unperformed contract –
that is, each party has the unilateral, enforceable right to terminate the contract
at the end of the then-current month without compensating the other party. A
new contract will be deemed to exist for purposes of applying Topic 606 each
month once each party forgoes its cancellation right for that period.
ABC considers whether Customer’s option to renew on an indefinite basis
provides it with a material right. Consistent with the discussion in
Question C410, ABC concludes the options to renew do not provide Customer
with a material right because the renewal price will only be greater than or
equal to the stand-alone selling price of the SaaS as of contract inception.



                  Example B130.2
                  Contract with a specified term cancellable by either
                  party
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer a three-year term
license to software product G, and provide technical support and unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancements (collectively, PCS) for a one-year period.
The stand-alone selling price and the contract price of the term license is
$600,000 and the stand-alone selling price and contract price of one year of PCS
is $120,000. Customer pays $720,000 in combined fees at contract inception.
Scenario 1: Termination option for only part of the license term
Customer has the option to terminate the contract at the end of any month
during the first year after the first month and would be entitled to a pro rata
refund of the license and the PCS fees paid. For example, if Customer
terminates at the end of Month 6, Customer would be entitled to a refund of
30/36ths of the $600,000 license fee ($500,000) and 6/12ths of the $120,000
PCS fee ($60,000). ABC concludes that while the PCS is a single performance
obligation (see Question C150), the PCS is distinct from the software license
(see Questions C160 and C170). ABC expects Customer to exercise renewal
options to continue PCS for Years 2 and 3 at the same price as for Year 1, but
there is no obligation for Customer to do so. After Year 1, Customer is no
longer permitted to terminate the software license before the end of the
contractual three-year term, even if Customer does not renew PCS.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        116
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



ABC concludes that the performance obligations in the contract include only a
one-month software license and one month of PCS, rather than the three-year
term license and one year of PCS outlined in the contract. Because Customer
has the enforceable right to cancel the contract at the end of any month during
the initial PCS term after Month 1 and receive a pro rata refund, each
subsequent month (i.e. beyond Month 1) embodies a customer option to
continue to license software product G and obtain PCS for an additional fee.
Therefore, the contract includes 11 one-month renewal options of the software
license and 11 one-month PCS renewal options, and options to renew the
product G license for two years at the end of Year 1, and to renew PCS for
one year at the end of Year 1 and Year 2.
The license and PCS renewal options do not provide Customer with a material
right. ABC reaches this conclusion on the basis that the price of each monthly
license and PCS renewal, i.e. during the first year of the contractual license
term, is equal to the price of the initial one-month license and PCS (calculated
as the contractual fees paid, less the pro rata refund due to Customer if the
contract is canceled at the end of Month 1). ABC further notes that the
two-year product G renewal option, and the two one-year PCS renewal options
are also priced consistently with the initial one-month license/PCS contract, and
that Customer is entitled to a full pro rata refund of the license fees for the
remaining two years if Customer terminates the license. Therefore, because
none of the options grant Customer a material right, each renewal is accounted
for as a new, separate contract when exercised (see Question G40).
ABC will recognize the same amount in each month of the first year of the
contract:
— on the first day of the month, the revenue attributable to a one-month
  license to software product G; and
— the revenue attributable to one month of PCS over the course of the month
  using an appropriate measure of progress (see Question F220).
During the second year of the contract, ABC will recognize:
— on the first day of Year 2, the revenue attributable to the two-year software
  product G license; and
— the revenue attributable to Year 2 PCS over the course of Year 2 using an
  appropriate measure of progress.
Over the third year of the contract, ABC will recognize the revenue attributable
to the Year 3 PCS using an appropriate measure of progress.
Scenario 2: Termination option for the entire license term
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 1, except that the license and PCS term
is three years. Customer pays $720,000 at contract inception ($600,000 for the
three-year license and $120,000 for Year 1 of PCS) and pays PCS fees for each
subsequent year at the beginning of Year 2 and Year 3. Customer has the right
to terminate the license and PCS at the end of each month during the three-
year stated term. For example, if Customer terminates the license at the end of
month 30, Customer would be entitled to a refund of 6/36ths of the $600,000
license fee ($100,000) and 6/12ths of the Year 3 $120,000 PCS fee paid at the
beginning of Year 3 ($60,000).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        117
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



For the same reasons as in Scenario 1, Customer’s options to renew the
license for another month each month throughout the contract period, do not
grant Customer a material right. Consequently, ABC’s revenue recognition will
be the same each month during the three-year contract. Each month, ABC will
recognize:
— on the first day of the month, the revenue attributable to a one-month
  license to software product G; and
— the revenue attributable to one month of PCS over the course of the month
  using an appropriate measure of progress.
Scenario 3: Nonrefundable upfront fee
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 2, except that Customer pays a
nonrefundable upfront fee of $960,000 at contract inception for the three-year
term license and PCS. The stand-alone selling price and the contract price of the
term license is $600,000 and the stand-alone selling price and contract price of
three years of PCS is $360,000. Customer has the option to terminate the
contract at the end of any month during the three-year term. On termination,
the customer is not entitled to a refund and loses the right to use the software.
ABC Corp. accounts for this arrangement as a three-year contract. As discussed
in Question B150, the termination right is not substantive because the
nonrefundable upfront fee is the only consideration in the contract. In contrast
to Scenario 2, the absence of a pro-rata refund option indicates that Customer
does not have to make a substantive, separate purchasing decision (i.e.
substantive option) at the end of any month about whether to acquire additional
software licenses, because it is not deciding whether to exercise a right to
spend more money to acquire an additional license and PCS.
ABC Corp. allocates $600,000 to the term license, which is recognized upfront
on transfer of control (right to use and benefit from the license) and $360,000 to
the PCS, which is recognized using an appropriate measure of progress.
Scenario 4: Refund is unknown
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 2, except that on termination, the
contract states that ABC Corp. and Customer will negotiate a refund for
Customer.
ABC Corp. accounts for this contract as a three-year contract. Unless ABC Corp.
can demonstrate it has enforceable rights and obligations to provide a pro rata
refund, the termination right is not substantive, because the customer does not
have a separate purchasing decision that it can make without ABC Corp., and
therefore the termination right is not similar to a customer option to renew.
ABC Corp. allocates $600,000 to the term license, which is recognized upfront
on transfer of control (right to use and benefit from the license) and $360,000 to
the PCS, which is recognized using an appropriate measure of progress.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        118
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Example B130.3
                  Term-based license with a reseller with monthly
                  cancellation
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with a reseller to transfer a one-year term
license to software product G, and provide technical support and unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancements (collectively, PCS) for a one-year period.
ABC Corp. determines that there are two distinct performance obligations (term
license and PCS). The stand-alone selling price and the contract price of the
term license is $200,000 and the stand-alone selling price and contract price of
one year of PCS is $120,000. Customer pays $320,000 in combined fees at
contract inception.
The reseller has the option to terminate the contract at the end of any month
during the one-year term. On termination, the reseller is entitled to a pro rata
refund and loses the right to use the software. In a separate arrangement, the
reseller agrees to provide software product G and PCS to a third party end-user
for a one-year term. The contract between the reseller and end-user is
non-cancellable.
ABC determines that the reseller is the customer and that the reseller takes
control of the license and PCS before they transfer to the third party end-user.
Further, PCS is provided directly to the reseller and not the third party end-user.
The contract between ABC Corp. and the reseller is a principal-to-principal
contract.
ABC Corp. accounts for this arrangement as 12 individual monthly contracts, i.e.
the lesser of the contractual period of one year and the one-month period in
which the contract can be terminated without penalty. Therefore, ABC Corp.
would recognize as revenue $26,667 per month for the one-year term (monthly
ratable recognition). The options to renew do not provide Customer with a
material right because the renewal price will be greater than or equal to the
stand-alone selling price of the PCS as of contract inception.
ABC Corp. is not a party to the contract with the third party end-user customer
(who is the customer of the reseller) and does not provide services to the end
user. ABC Corp.’s customer is the reseller and the contract between reseller
and the third party end-user does not affect the conclusion reached on the
contract between ABC Corp. and the reseller.



                  Example B130.4
                  Perpetual license
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer a perpetual license
to software product G, and provide technical support and unspecified updates,
upgrades and enhancements (collectively, PCS) for a three-year period, which is
the economic life of the software. ABC Corp. determines that there are two
distinct performance obligations (perpetual license and PCS). The stand-alone
selling price and the contract price of the perpetual license is $600,000 and the
stand-alone selling price and contract price of three years of PCS is $360,000.
Customer pays $960,000 in combined fees at contract inception.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                         119
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



Scenario 1: Perpetual license and mandatory PCS with pro rata refund
Customer has the option to terminate the contract at the end of any month. On
termination of either the license or PCS, Customer is entitled to a pro rata
refund for the PCS and perpetual license and loses the right to use the
software. The pro rata refund for the perpetual license is calculated based on
the economic life of the license of three years. For example, if Customer
terminates the license at the end of month 30, Customer would be entitled to a
refund of 6/36ths of the $960,000 license and PCS fees ($160,000).
Question C200 and the examples (C200.1 through C200.3) therein discuss
mandatory PCS in which a customer forfeits its rights to a perpetual license if it
does not renew PCS. Scenario 1 is similar, as Customer must renew the
contract and PCS to maintain the software license. Consistent with
Question C200 and the related examples, the option to terminate the contract
at the end of each month and obtain a pro rata refund of the PCS license fee
results in a one-month contract for a term license and PCS with 35 monthly
renewal options.
In this scenario, the renewal period lasts for the economic life of the licensed
software and, therefore, we do not believe an additional perpetual license is
granted at the end of the term. However, if the economic life of the software
was longer than three years, at the end of the three-year term a perpetual
license would be granted, which likely indicates that there is a material right.
See Question C200 and Example C200.2 on mandatory PCS for further
discussion.
Scenario 2: Perpetual license with pro rata refund for PCS only
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 1, except that the contractual price for
the perpetual license is $300,000, the PCS price is $360,000, the pro rata
refund relates to PCS only (i.e. the license fee is nonrefundable) and the license
is not forfeited upon termination. The stand-alone selling price of the perpetual
license is $600,000 and the stand-alone selling price of PCS is $360,000.
ABC Corp. accounts for this agreement as a contract for the perpetual license
and one month of PCS with 35 individual monthly options to renew the PCS.
The total non-cancellable amount of $310,000 is allocated to the upfront
perpetual license and one month of PCS based on their relative stand-alone
selling prices. Therefore, ABC Corp. would recognize license revenue of
$304,918 upfront and PCS of $5,082 in the first month.
ABC allocates the transaction price as follows.

                                                                      Stand-
 Performance                                  Contract                 alone                 Selling                   Price
 obligation                                      price          selling price             price ratio             allocation
 Perpetual license                            $300,000               $600,000                  98.36%              $304,918
 PCS                                              10,0001                10,000                 1.64%                    5,082
 Total                                        $310,000               $610,000                100.00%               $310,000

 Note:
 1.     $10,000 is the non-cancellable amount of the PCS fee for the current month (i.e. if the
        contract is terminated at the end of month 1, Customer would be entitled to a refund
        of 35/36ths of the $360,000 PCS fee ($350,000)).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        120
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



Each month thereafter, ABC Corp would recognize $10,000 in PCS revenue.
Note that this treatment results in an accounting model that is capped by the
cash amounts collected.



                   Example B130.5
                   Presentation of prepayment liability for cancellable
                   contracts
On June 30, Year 1, Software Host enters into a contract with Customer to
provide Customer with access to its hosted application for three years on a
software-as-a-service (SaaS) basis. It concludes that its performance obligation
to provide SaaS is satisfied over time because Customer receives and
consumes benefits from the hosted application, as Software Host provides that
access.
Software Host charges $180,000 a year for access to its hosted application,
required to be prepaid at the start of each contractual year. The contract
includes a provision that allows Customer to terminate the contract without
penalty at the end of any designated month in exchange for a pro rata refund of
its prepayment. Software Host concludes that a contract does not exist for
periods beyond the then-current month.
The prepayment liability is presented as a deposit liability and not a contract
liability. Because the contract term does not exist beyond the then-current
month, there is no obligation to transfer a future month of hosting until
Customer chooses to renew the contract for the subsequent month by not
exercising its right to terminate. The deposit liability is presented separately
from contract liabilities in the balance sheet.



                  Question B140
                  How does a termination penalty affect the
                  assessment of the contract term?

Interpretive response: It may be the case that services provided under a
contract can be terminated only by compensating the other party. For example,
one party may be required to pay the other a termination penalty, which may be
characterized explicitly as a termination penalty or otherwise characterized (e.g.
as a requirement to either (1) continue to pay the contractual fees for a period
of time even after services are no longer being provided or (2) forfeit of an
otherwise refundable deposit paid to the entity upfront). If the right to
compensation in the event of termination is substantive, then the duration of
the contract is the shorter of the stated term or the period up to the point at
which the contract can be terminated without paying substantive
compensation.
A substantive termination penalty that compensates the other party is evidence
that enforceable rights and obligations exist throughout the entire stated term.
In other words, only by paying the penalty is the terminating party relieved of its




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        121
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



remaining enforceable obligations, and only in return for that compensation
does the non-terminating party forgo its remaining enforceable rights.
Discussions of the TRG at the November 2015 meeting concluded that entities
should reach the same conclusion as outlined in the preceding paragraphs
regardless of whether both entities have the right to terminate the contract or
only the customer. Therefore, if only the customer has the right to terminate
the contract in return for paying a substantive penalty, the contract term is the
shorter of the stated term or the period up to the point at which the customer
has the right to terminate the contract without paying a substantive penalty.
In making the assessment of whether a termination penalty is substantive, an
entity considers all relevant factors, including whether the penalty is
insignificant. A penalty that is insignificant would generally not change the
enforceable rights or obligations of the parties from those that would exist
absent the requirement to pay a penalty.
The substantive evaluation would also generally include consideration of the
legal enforceability of the right to compensation on termination. For example,
depending on the facts and circumstances, an entity’s past practice of not
enforcing termination penalties (e.g. allowing customers to terminate the
contract without enforcing collection of the termination penalty) may result in a
conclusion that the termination penalty is not enforceable under the relevant
laws of the jurisdiction governing the contract. These types of circumstances
may require legal analysis. If the entity’s past practice makes its right to
compensation upon termination (and the customer’s obligation to pay that
amount) unenforceable based on the applicable laws and regulations, then the
entity would assess the contract term as it would for a contract without a
termination penalty (see Question B130). In contrast, if the entity’s past practice
does not change the parties’ legally enforceable rights and obligations, then that
past practice would not affect whether the termination penalty is substantive.
When a cancellation occurs
If a cancellation occurs during the contract term determined in accordance with
the first paragraph of this question (e.g. the customer terminates the contract
regardless of having to pay a substantive termination penalty), the termination is
accounted for as a contract modification as it changes the scope of the contract
by shortening it.



                  Example B140.1
                  Past practice of allowing customers to terminate
                  without enforcing collection of the termination
                  penalty
ABC Corp. enters into a contract to provide services to Customer for
24 months. Customer has the enforceable right to terminate the contract by
paying a substantive penalty to ABC. The penalty does not change during the
contract term. ABC has a past practice of allowing customers to terminate
substantially similar contracts after 12 months without enforcing collection of
the termination penalty.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                            122
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



Because the termination penalty is substantive, it affects the enforceable rights
and obligations under the contract for both parties such that the contract term is
the shorter of the 24 month stated term or the period for which Customer must
pay a substantive termination penalty.
The period during which Customer must pay a substantive penalty may be
affected by ABC’s past practice of not enforcing the termination penalty after
12 months if that past practice is considered to restrict its legal right to enforce
the termination penalty, or Customer’s legal obligation to pay, after 12 months.
The determination in this regard could vary depending on the laws and
regulations of the jurisdiction governing the contract and potentially other
factors.
If ABC’s past practice does not change its enforceable rights (and,
correspondingly Customer’s enforceable obligations), the contract term will be
the full 24-month stated term. However, if ABC’s past practice results in the
conclusion that the termination penalty is not enforceable under the relevant
laws and regulations of the governing jurisdiction, the contract term is only
12 months – that is, the period during which a substantive penalty applies.



                  Example B140.2
                  Contract term with decreasing termination penalty
ABC Corp. enters into a four-year contract with Customer to provide SaaS. The
contract requires Customer to pay an annual fee of $100. Customer can
terminate the contract at any point without cause, but until year 4 would incur a
termination penalty. ABC always enforces its right to receive a termination
penalty. The penalty decreases annually throughout the contract term. The
following table illustrates the payments under the contract, as well as the
termination penalty that would apply during each year of the stated
contract term.

                                                                Year 1            Year 2             Year 3            Year 4
 Annual fee                                                       $100               $100              $100               $100
 Termination penalty                                                  30                20                 10                   -
 Cumulative fee if customer
 cancels in this year                                             $130               $220              $310               $400

ABC concludes that the penalty is substantive as it is neither insignificant, nor is
there any question as to the enforceability of the termination penalty. In this
example, the termination penalty represents at least 10% of the remaining
annual fees (in aggregate) in the periods subsequent to the period in which the
contract is terminated until it goes away in year 4, which ABC concludes is not
an insignificant penalty.
ABC determines that the contract term is three years under Topic 606. Three
years is the shorter of the stated contract term (four years) and the period
during which a substantive termination penalty applies to any Customer
cancellation (three years).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        123
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



The termination penalty does not affect ABC’s accounting for the three-year
contract (i.e. no portion of the penalty is factored into the transaction price of
the contract, nor does the penalty change that ABC’s performance obligation is
to provide the SaaS for three years) unless the contract is terminated, at which
point the termination will be accounted for as a modification of the contract.



                  Question B150
                  Does forfeiture of a significant upfront fee
                  constitute a termination penalty?

Interpretive response: It depends. A customer may pay a significant upfront
fee that it would forfeit upon termination of the contract. Whether forfeiture of
this fee constitutes a termination penalty depends on whether the fee would be
refundable if the contract is not terminated.
Upfront fee is refundable. In general, forfeiture of an upfront fee does not
constitute a termination penalty unless the customer would be entitled to a
refund of that fee if it does not terminate the contract. For example, if a customer
pays a $100 upfront fee to an entity at the beginning of a four-year contract, and
will receive that fee (or a significant portion thereof) back only if it chooses not to
exercise a termination right, we believe the requirement to forfeit the upfront fee
is no different from having to pay a $100 fee upon termination.
Upfront fee is nonrefundable. If an upfront fee is nonrefundable, its forfeiture
generally does not constitute a termination penalty because the refundability is
not contingent on termination. Instead, an entity generally considers whether
payment of the fee provides the customer with a material right with respect to
renewing the services (including by not electing an option to cancel the
services). Whether payment of a nonrefundable upfront fee provides the
customer with a material right upon renewal of a services contract is discussed
in Question C410.
Notwithstanding that the non-refundable fee generally does not constitute a
termination penalty, there are fact patterns where the customer’s ability to
terminate a contract with an upfront fee does not affect the contract term. This
would be the case if a nonrefundable upfront fee is the only consideration in a
contract that meets the contract existence criterion. In that case, the customer
does not have a separate purchasing decision to make with respect to renewing
(i.e. by not terminating) the contract because it has prepaid, on a nonrefundable
basis, for all the goods or services promised in the contract. Therefore, the
termination option is not substantive, and any contractual termination right does
not affect the contract term and a material rights analysis would not be
performed. For example, a one-year service contract where the customer pays
a nonrefundable upfront fee that is the only consideration would be considered
a one-year contract regardless of whether the customer could technically
terminate the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        124
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Question B160
                  Does a cancellation provision exist if the contract is
                  silent as to cancellation or termination?

Interpretive response: In general, if a contract does not provide for
cancellation or termination, the entity should generally conclude the
contract term is the stated term in the contract. However, as discussed in
paragraph 606-10-25-3, the duration of a customer contract (i.e. the contractual
period) is dictated by the present enforceable rights and obligations of the
parties to the contract. Therefore, it may be that a legally enforceable
cancellation or termination provision exists even if the written contract is silent
in this regard. If such a provision exists, entities still need to consider whether a
termination penalty would apply (see Questions B140 and B150).



                  Question B170
                  Does a cancellation provision available only upon a
                  substantive breach of contract affect the contract
                  term?
Interpretive response: No. If a contract exists under Topic 606, that means the
parties can identify their rights and obligations under the contract and are
committed to perform their respective obligations – see paragraph 606-10-25-1.
Therefore, if a contract exists, an entity would not assume that a substantive
breach of contract will occur when determining the contract term.



                  Question B180
                  Does a contract exist during ‘free-trial’ periods
                  before the customer accepts an offer to continue
                  the services beyond the free-trial period?
Interpretive response: Entities such as SaaS providers frequently offer
customers the right to obtain their services for free for a period of time (i.e. a
‘free-trial period’) during which the customer can decide to contract for the
services going forward (e.g. the customer can decide to obtain the entity’s SaaS
for 12 or 36 months after the end of the free-trial period). SaaS providers
frequently offer additional incentives (e.g. free or discounted professional
services or a discounted price of the SaaS) if the customer enters into a long-
term contract for the entity’s SaaS.
Some stakeholders in the United States asked the question about what
services would be sales incentives and what services would be part of a
contract with a customer if the customer accepts the entity’s offer before the
free-trial period ends. Based on discussions with the FASB staff, it is our
understanding that their view is that services provided during a free-trial period,
before the customer accepts the entity’s offer to provide services beyond the
free-trial period, should be accounted for as sales incentives. No contract exists




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        125
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



until the customer accepts the entity’s offer to provide services after the free-
trial period because the customer can opt-out anytime during the free-trial
period. That is, no enforceable right to consideration exists for the entity until
the customer contracts for post-trial period services. Once the customer
accepts the entity’s offer, the entity should account for remaining free trial
period services (from the date a contract exists) and the post-free trial services
as committed performance obligations of the contract.
The FASB staff further indicated that, in limited circumstances, it may be
reasonable to account for only the post-free trial period goods or services (i.e.
those that were part of the offer to the customer) as performance obligations of
the customer contract. The staff indicated this would be the case only if either
(1) the customer’s right to the remaining free-trial period goods or services was
not enforceable, or (2) on a portfolio basis, accounting for only the post-free trial
period goods or services as performance obligations would not materially differ
from accounting for both the remaining free trial period goods or services and
the post-free trial period goods or services as performance obligations of the
contract with the customer.



                  Example B180.1
                  Free-trial period
ABC Corp. offers three free months of its SaaS to Customer. At any time during
the three-month free-trial period, Customer can decide to continue the SaaS for
12 months after the end of the three-month free-trial period for a fee of
$12,000, payable $1,000 in advance of each month during the 12-month post-
trial period.
ABC’s accounting for this contract depends on when Customer accepts ABC’s
offer to provide 12 months of its SaaS after the end of the free-trial period.
For example:
— If Customer accepts and agrees to pay for the post-trial period services on
  Day 1 of the free-trial period, ABC’s performance obligation is to provide
  15 months of SaaS for $12,000 and, therefore, would recognize $800 each
  of the 15 months that SaaS is provided under the contract ($12,000 ÷
  15 months = $800). None of the cost of providing the SaaS during the free-
  trial period would be recognized as a sales and marketing expense.
— If Customer accepts and agrees to pay for the post-trial period services at
  the beginning of the third month of the three-month free-trial period, ABC’s
  performance obligation is to provide 13 months of its SaaS for $12,000 and,
  therefore, would recognize $923 each of the 13 months that SaaS is
  provided under the contract ($12,000 ÷ 13 months = $923). The cost of
  providing the first two months of the SaaS during the free-trial period would
  be recognized as a sales and marketing expense.
— If Customer accepts and agrees to pay for the post-trial period SaaS on the
  last day of the three-month free-trial period, ABC’s performance obligation
  is to provide 12 months of SaaS for $12,000 and, therefore, would
  recognize $1,000 each of the 12 months that SaaS is provided under the
  contract ($12,000 ÷ 12 months = $1,000). The cost of providing the three




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        126
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



      free-trial months of the SaaS would be recognized as a sales and
      marketing expense.
Note that in either of the first two scenarios, ABC would be recognizing
revenue on the SaaS before it is legally entitled to receive any consideration
from Customer. For example, in the first scenario, ABC will recognize $2,400
before it is legally permitted to bill Customer for the SaaS. ABC’s offsetting
entry is to a contract asset, which ABC will derecognize over the 12-month
contract period once it begins to bill Customer under the terms of the contract.
Alternatively, it may be reasonable, regardless of when Customer accepts and
agrees to pay for the post-trial period services, to consider ABC’s performance
obligation as one to provide 12 months of post-trial period SaaS for $12,000. In
that case, ABC would recognize $1,000 each of the 12 months that SaaS is
provided under the contract ($12,000 ÷ 12 months = $1,000). The cost of
providing the remaining free-trial months of the SaaS would be recognized as a
sales and marketing expense. This alternative would only be appropriate if
either:
— ABC does not have an enforceable obligation, as a result of entering into
  the contract with Customer, to provide the remaining free-trial period SaaS;
  or
— ABC has a number of similar contracts that would permit it to apply this
  accounting on a portfolio approach basis (i.e. on a portfolio basis,
  accounting for committed free-trial period SaaS as a sales and marketing
  cost for contracts in the portfolio would not materially affect the entity’s
  accounting results).




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, arrangement consideration is limited to only non-
contingent amounts (often referred to as the ‘contingent cash cap’). That means,
in a SaaS contract that provides the customer with three free or six discounted
months of service or discounted implementation services, revenue recognized as
those free or discounted services are provided is limited to amounts that are not
contingent on the provision of future services.
Topic 606 has no prohibition on recognizing contingent revenue. Entities
applying the approach illustrated as Alternative 1 in Example B180.1 will
generally allocate more revenue to free or discounted services provided at the
outset of a contract than they do under legacy US GAAP, which will accelerate
overall revenue recognition under contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        127
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




Combining contracts

                  Question B190
                  What constitutes ‘at or near the same time’ when
                  evaluating whether two or more contracts should
                  be combined?
Interpretive response: Topic 606 does not provide a ‘bright line’ for evaluating
what constitutes ‘at or near the same time’ to determine whether two or more
contracts should be combined. Therefore, we believe an entity might adopt an
accounting policy as to what represents a minimum period of time that would
evidence two or more contracts were entered into ‘at or near the same time’.
Many entities have had an accounting policy under legacy US GAAP in this
regard, and that policy may remain reasonable under Topic 606, provided that
policy (or any new policy) appropriately considers the entity’s customary
business practices and other reasonable expectations, such as recent changes
to contracting practices or licenses/services offered. For example, an entity may
perform services for a majority of the customers that license its software
products or obtain its software-as-a-service and have a business practice of
entering into follow-on contracts to provide those services. In this scenario, the
entity might specifically consider the period of time that generally elapses
between the initiation of the contract for the software license or the SaaS and
the follow-on contract for the services in determining what represents a
minimum period of time within which the entity would conclude two or more
contracts were entered into at or near the same time.
However, just because two contracts are not entered into within the minimum
period of time established by the entity does not mean they were not entered
into ‘at or near the same time’. An entity should have processes in place that
consider specific facts and circumstances in cases that may not be ‘customary’
or usual. For example, an entity should not ignore the fact that two non-
standard agreements, such as ones that are different from or larger than the
entity’s typical arrangements, were being discussed or negotiated over the
same period of time and would appear to be significantly interrelated solely
because they were not executed within the entity’s established
‘minimum period’.
An entity should have processes and controls to ensure multiple contracts
initiated with the same customer at or near the same time are identified on a
timely basis and, therefore, appropriately considered as to whether they should
be accounted for as a single contract. This may include processes and controls
to identify ongoing negotiations so that revenue related to a contract is not
recognized until the entity has evaluated whether the contract(s) under
negotiation should be combined with other contracts.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        128
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Question B200
                  If an entity and/or its customer have multiple
                  divisions (business units), should contracts entered
                  into between different divisions be evaluated for
                  possible combination?
Interpretive response: Yes. There is no exception for considering whether two
or more contracts should be combined because they were executed by
different divisions of the entity and/or the customer; in fact, contracts with
related parties of the customer that are not part of the same consolidated entity
are considered for possible combination. However, whether the contracts were
negotiated by the same parties or, instead, were negotiated with different
divisions of the entity or the customer may influence whether any of the three
specified criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-9 are met. For example, two contracts
entered into by different divisions of one or both parties may be less likely to
have been ‘negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective’ or to
have goods or services that are a single performance obligation.



                  Question B210
                  Are the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-9 similar to
                  the indicators of contract combination in legacy
                  US GAAP?
Interpretive response: Legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition
guidance included a series of indicators to consider when determining whether
two or more contracts should be combined. Because the contract combination
guidance in Topic 606 is similar in concept to that in legacy US GAAP, we
believe it is useful to consider how the legacy US GAAP indicators, with which
entities should be familiar, compare to the specified contract combination
criteria in Topic 606. The following table describes the similarities between the
indicators under the legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance
and the specified criteria under Topic 606. Note that there were six indicators in
the legacy US GAAP guidance, and some of them relate to more than one of
the Topic 606 criteria.

  Indicator under legacy software                                  Related criterion (or criteria) under
  guidance                                                         Topic 606
  (para 985-605-55-4)                                              (para 606-10-25-9)
  a.    The contracts or agreements are                            The first criterion in Topic 606 for
        negotiated or executed within a                            determining when an entity combines
        short timeframe of each other.                             two or more contracts and accounts for
                                                                   them as a single contract is that the
                                                                   contracts have to be entered into at or
                                                                   near the same time. This indicator is
                                                                   similar to that first criterion.
  b.    The different elements are closely                         a.     The contracts were negotiated as a
        interrelated or interdependent in                                 package with a single commercial
        terms of design, technology or                                    objective; and/or
        function.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        129
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




  Indicator under legacy software                                  Related criterion (or criteria) under
  guidance                                                         Topic 606
  (para 985-605-55-4)                                              (para 606-10-25-9)
                                                                   c.     The goods or services promised in
                                                                          the contracts (or some goods or
                                                                          services promised in each of the
                                                                          contracts) are a single performance
                                                                          obligation in accordance with
                                                                          paragraphs 606-10-25-14 through
                                                                          25-22.
  c.    The fee for one or more contracts or                       b.     The amount of consideration to be
        agreements is subject to refund,                                  paid in one contract depends on the
        forfeiture or other concession if                                 price or performance of the other
        another contract is not completed                                 contracts.
        satisfactorily.
  d.    One or more elements in one                                a.     The contracts are negotiated as a
        contract or agreement are essential                               package with a single commercial
        to the functionality of an element in                             objective; and/or
        another contract or agreement.                             c.     The goods or services promised in
                                                                          the contracts (or some goods or
                                                                          services promised in each of the
                                                                          contracts) are a single performance
                                                                          obligation in accordance with
                                                                          paragraphs 606-10-25-14 through 25-
                                                                          22.
  e.    Payment terms under one contract                           b.     The amount of consideration to be
        or agreement coincide with                                        paid in one contract depends on the
        performance criteria of another                                   price or performance of the other
        contract or agreement.                                            contracts.
  f.    The negotiations are conducted                             a.     The contracts are negotiated as a
        jointly with two or more parties (e.g.                            package with a single commercial
        from different divisions of the same                              objective; and/or
        entity) to do what in essence is a                         c.     The goods or services promised in
        single project.                                                   the contracts (or some goods or
                                                                          services promised in each of the
                                                                          contracts) are a single performance
                                                                          obligation in accordance with
                                                                          paragraphs 606-10-25-14 through
                                                                          25-22.

The preceding table is just a ‘bridge’ between the legacy and the new guidance.
Just like under legacy US GAAP, significant judgment will be required in many
cases to determine if one or more of the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-9 are
met. And while, as outlined in the preceding table, there is a relationship
between the legacy indicators and the new criteria, that relationship does not
mean a particular Topic 606 criterion will be evaluated in the same way as the
legacy US GAAP indicator. For example, as discussed in Chapter C – Step 2:
Identify the performance obligations in the contract, an entity may reach
different conclusions under legacy US GAAP about whether an element is
‘essential to the functionality’ or ‘closely interrelated or interdependent in terms
of design, technology or function’ to another element and whether two or more
promised goods or services are distinct from each other under Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        130
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



An entity should establish processes and controls to be able to identify multiple
contracts entered into with the same customer on a timely manner to ensure
that the entity is appropriately determining whether such contracts should be
combined. This may include processes and controls to identify ongoing
negotiations between the entity and the customer so that revenue related to a
contract is not recognized until the entity has evaluated whether the contract(s)
under negotiation should be combined.



                  Example B210.1
                  Combining contracts, Part I
ABC Corp. licenses trust asset management system software called Product B.
The Product B software enables users, typically large financial institutions, to
access and value individual US dollar denominated trust account portfolios on a
real-time basis. Product B functions as designed without any customization or
modification services and can be implemented without ABC’s assistance in
most cases.
ABC entered into a specific contract with Customer, a large international
commercial bank, to grant a license to the Product B software and,
approximately 45 days later, enters into a separately papered agreement to
provide services to modify the customer’s instance of the software. The
services include modification of the software code and configuration of certain
modified and off-the-shelf settings to allow Customer to access and value its
trust account portfolios in multiple foreign currencies.
While executed separately, the two agreements were negotiated during the
same time period (even though commencement and completion of the
negotiations of each were not co-terminus) and largely by the same ABC and
Customer personnel.
ABC concludes that, if the two contracts were combined, the license to
Product B and the professional services to customize and configure the
licensed software would be a single performance obligation (see Question C230
and Example C230.1). ABC also concludes that the two agreements were
negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective – i.e. to enable
Customer to use ABC’s software across its international operations.
Therefore, because the software license agreement and the services
agreement were entered into near the same time, the two agreements
constitute a single contract and ABC will account for the Product B license and
the professional services as a single performance obligation.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        131
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer




                  Example B210.2
                  Combining contracts, Part II
Assume the same facts as in Example B210.1 except for the following:
— The services agreement is executed nearly five months after the software
  license agreement.
— The size of the two agreements and the extent of the services are larger
  than any other arrangement ABC has entered into in recent years.
— ABC has an accounting policy, based on its customary business practices,
  that contracts entered into within 90 days of each other have been entered
  into ‘at or near the same time’.
Consistent with Example B210.1, ABC concludes both:
— That if the two contracts were combined, the license to Product B and the
  professional services to customize and configure the licensed software
  would be a single performance obligation (see Question C230); and
— The two agreements were negotiated as a package with a single
  commercial objective – that is, to enable Customer to use ABC’s software
  across its international operations.
In this case, ABC concludes the two agreements were entered into near the
same time as each other even though five months is longer than its established
policy of treating 90 days or less as ‘at or near the same time’. Consistent with
the discussion in Question B190, even though ABC has an accounting policy in
this regard that is reasonable to ABC’s customary customer arrangements, ABC
considers that this is an ‘atypical’ customer arrangement – i.e. it is unusually
large and complex – such that the specific facts and circumstances should also
be considered. The significantly overlapping negotiations and negotiating
parties, along with the overall context of the two agreements, leads ABC to
conclude that a delay in obtaining final agreement on the services contract does
not mean that contract and the license agreement were not entered into near
the same time as each other.



                  Example B210.3
                  Combining contracts, Part III
ABC Corp. enters into a software license agreement with Customer to license
Product E. Product E is fully functional upon basic installation that most
customers can perform themselves or obtain from numerous service providers
other than ABC. However, approximately one month after the license
agreement is concluded, Customer decides that it wants ABC to provide some
services so that Customer can more effectively use the Product E software.
Consequently, ABC and Customer enter into a services agreement for ABC to
provide specified implementation and configuration services.
The implementation and configuration services are not complex; ABC will build
some simple interfaces, configure available features in the Product E software
to Customer’s specifications, and then perform some user acceptance testing
to ensure everything works as intended. However, Customer views the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        132
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



services as important to its ability to immediately begin using the Product E
software as intended such that when it concludes the services agreement,
Customer requires inclusion of a clause that states Customer is permitted to
withhold up to 50% of installment license fees required under the software
license agreement until the services are successfully completed and accepted.
Even though there are two agreements, they were executed near the same
time – that is, only approximately one month apart – and the services
agreement effectively modifies the license agreement by changing its payment
terms (i.e. permitting a delay in Customer’s payments due under the license
agreement until the services agreement is fulfilled successfully). In addition, the
consideration to be paid for the Product E software license is dependent on the
successful completion of the implementation and configuration services in the
services agreement. Therefore, ABC concludes that the license agreement and
the services agreement should be combined for accounting purposes under
Topic 606. It is important to note, however, that just because ABC concludes
that the agreements should be combined, it does not necessarily follow that the
Product E software license and the implementation/configuration services are a
single performance obligation in the combined contract. For further discussion
on identifying the performance obligations in a contract (i.e. Step 2 of the
model), see Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in
the contract.



                   Question B220
                   Can contracts entered into at or near the same time
                   with multiple customers be combined?
Interpretive response: No. The FASB considered whether to specify that all
contracts should be combined if they were negotiated as a package to achieve
a single commercial objective, regardless of the customer. However, the FASB
decided against this approach because it was concerned that doing so could
have the unintended consequence of an entity combining too many contracts
and not faithfully depicting the entity’s performance. [ASU 2014-09.BC75]
Further, in an SEC staff speech, it was noted that the SEC’s Office of the Chief
Accountant had been consulted on the contract combination guidance. It was
noted that because Topic 606 explicitly limits what contracts may be combined,
the staff objected to a registrant’s proposal to extend the contract combination
guidance beyond contracts with the same customer or related parties of the
same customer. [2016 Baruch]



                   Question B230
                   Do purchase orders under the same MSA need to
                   be combined?
Interpretive response: It depends. Even if the MSA is not legally enforceable,
the pricing among the purchase orders may be interrelated and required to be
combined into a single contract. As a consequence, purchase orders that are




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                        133
                                                        B. Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer



issued separately should be evaluated and combined if the criteria for
combining contracts are met.
For example, if an entity receives two separate purchase orders at or near the
same time for units to be delivered in Month 1 and Month 2, then the entity
assesses whether the purchase orders were negotiated as a single commercial
package – e.g. price adjustments were made for cash flow reasons – or
independent of one another.
If the purchase orders are combined, this may result in the transaction price
allocated to performance obligations in an individual purchase order being
different from the stated contract price. For example, assume a customer
submits two purchase orders that are combined for 200 software seats each to
be transferred in Month 1 and Month 2 and stated the unit prices are $100 in
Month 1 and $80 in Month 2. In that scenario, the transaction price allocated to
each software seat would likely be $90 if the stand-alone selling price is the
same for each unit.
When purchase orders are not combined, the MSA may contain implicit or
explicit promises that are relevant to other steps in the revenue model. This
includes considering whether the pricing on subsequent purchase orders may
include a material right under Step 2 or any variable consideration under Step 3
(e.g. a rebate or discount) that are not disclosed in the purchase orders.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                              134
                                           C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




C.   Step 2: Identify the
     performance obligations
     in the contract
     Questions and Examples
     Identify the promised goods and services
     Determine which promised goods or services are
     performance obligations
     A series of distinct goods or services
     Questions & answers
     Q&A C5                    Does an entity apply the practical expedient for immaterial
                               goods or services on a contract-by-contract basis?
                               Example C5.1: Goods or services immaterial in the context of
                               the contract – qualitative assessment
     Q&A C10                   Do restrictions as to time, geography and/or use affect how
                               many software licenses are promised to the customer in the
                               contract?
                               Example C10.1: License restrictions
     Q&A C15                   Are promises to defend a patent, copyright or trademark an
                               administrative activity or a promised good or service?
     Q&A C16                   Is an exclusivity provision a promised good or service?
     Q&A C20                   Are remix rights in a software contract an additional promised
                               good or service to the customer?
     Q&A C30                   Is a contractual requirement to put the source code of a
                               software application into escrow a performance obligation?
     Q&A C40                   When does a promise to transfer multiple copies of a software
                               product constitute a promise to transfer multiple licenses?
                               Example C40.1: Multiple copies are multiple licenses
                               Example C40.2: Multiple copies are not multiple licenses
     Q&A C50                   Is a promise to provide appropriate end-user documentation a
                               promise to transfer a good to the customer?
     Q&A C60                   Is a software entity’s participation in a joint steering committee
                               (JSC) considered a promised service in a contract with a
                               customer?
     Q&A C70                   Is a customer’s right to return a product or a right to a refund
                               for services a performance obligation?




     © 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
     member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              135
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Q&A C80                   Under what circumstances is the right to exchange one or
                          more software licenses for one or more alternative licenses
                          considered an additional performance obligation?
                          Example C80.1: Right to exchange a software license
                          Example C80.2: Right to exchange a software license for an
                          unspecified software license
                          Example C80.3: Right to return software licenses in exchange
                          for credit toward unspecified software licenses
Q&A C85                   How should a software vendor account for a right to convert a
                          software license to SaaS?
Q&A C90                   How does a pattern of granting concessions to customers in
                          the form of free or significantly discounted goods or services
                          affect an entity’s identification of the promised goods or
                          services in contracts with its customers?
                          Example C90.1: Pattern of granting concessions
Q&A C100                  Are promises to provide services to a reseller’s end customers
                          performance obligations of the software entity in its contract
                          with the reseller?
                          Example C100.1: Technical support and unspecified upgrade
                          rights provided to a reseller’s end-user customers
Q&A C110                  Are software licenses capable of being distinct in accordance
                          with paragraph 606-10-25-19(a)?
Q&A C120                  If an arrangement includes multiple software licenses (e.g.
                          licenses to multiple software applications or modules), which
                          may or may not be transferred to the customer at different
                          points in time, how should an entity evaluate if those licenses
                          are separate performance obligations?
Q&A C130                  Is the nature of an entity’s promise to provide technical support
                          or unspecified (when-and-if available) updates, upgrades and
                          enhancements a stand-ready obligation?
Q&A C140                  If an obligation to provide technical support services or one to
                          provide unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights is a
                          stand-ready obligation, is the obligation a ‘series’ of distinct
                          service periods?
Q&A C150                  Are the component services of PCS separate performance
                          obligations?
Q&A C160                  Are technical support services distinct from the software
                          license to which they relate?
Q&A C170                  How does a software vendor evaluate whether a software
                          license is distinct from a promise to provide unspecified
                          updates, upgrades and enhancements?
                          Example C170.1: Software license and PCS
                          Example C170.2: Software license and updates (1)




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              136
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                          Example C170.3: Software license and updates (2)
Q&A C175                  If a software license and update rights are not distinct from
                          each other, what is the effect of a renewal option for the
                          update rights if the license and those initial rights are not co-
                          terminus?
Q&A C180                  Are the considerations with respect to determining the
                          performance obligations for promises of technical support and
                          unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements different in a
                          SaaS arrangement and a software licensing arrangement?
Q&A C190                  Can a promise to provide technical support services or to
                          provide unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements be
                          implied?
Q&A C200                  If technical support services or unspecified update, upgrade
                          and enhancement rights are mandatory, does that affect the
                          conclusion about whether the software license and those
                          services are distinct?
                          Example C200.1: Software license and mandatory PCS
                          (term license)
                          Example C200.2: Software license and mandatory PCS
                          (perpetual license)
                          Example C200.3: Software license and mandatory PCS –
                          license fee paid over time
Q&A C210                  If a customer reinstates technical support and/or unspecified
                          update, upgrade and enhancement rights after allowing them to
                          lapse, are those services distinct from any promises to provide
                          updated or enhanced software (i.e. releases the customer did
                          not get during the lapse) as part of the reinstatement?
Q&A C220                  What should a SaaS provider consider in evaluating if upfront
                          services it provides in a SaaS arrangement are a promised
                          service or solely an administrative task/set-up activity that does
                          not transfer a good or service to the customer?
                          Example C220.1: Set-up activities vs implementation services
                          in a SaaS arrangement
Q&A C230                  How should an entity evaluate whether professional services to
                          significantly customize or modify the licensed software are
                          distinct from the associated software license?
                          Example C230.1: Software license and customization services
                          How should an entity evaluate whether implementation and
Q&A C240                  installation-type services are distinct from the associated
                          software license?
                          Example C240.1: Software and implementation services
                          If an entity provides multiple implementation services, are each
Q&A C250                  of those services a separate performance obligation?




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              137
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Q&A C260                  How does an entity evaluate whether implementation services
                          that are complex, but do not significantly customize or modify
                          the software, are distinct from the associated software license?
                          Example C260.1: Software license and complex
                          implementation services (complex interfacing)
Q&A C270                  Are there instances where configuration services, not
                          accompanied by customization services, would not be distinct
                          from the associated software license?
Q&A C280                  Are the considerations for a SaaS provider different from the
                          considerations for an entity licensing software when
                          determining whether professional services are distinct from the
                          SaaS?
                          Example C280.1: Upfront professional services and SaaS
                          Example C280.2: SaaS and complex implementation services
                          How should an entity evaluate whether a license is a
Q&A C290                  component of a tangible good that is integral to the functionality
                          of the good?
                          In an arrangement that includes a software license and hosting
Q&A C300                  services, are the software license and the hosting services
                          separate performance obligations?
                          Example C300.1: Software license, customization services and
                          hosting services
                          What should an entity consider when evaluating whether a
Q&A C310                  software license and a SaaS element in a ‘hybrid SaaS’ (or
                          ‘hybrid cloud’) arrangement are distinct from each other?
                          Example C310.1: On-premise software part of a combined
                          solution
                          Example C310.2: SaaS with an ‘offline mode’
                          Example C310.3: On-premise software with ‘additive’ SaaS
                          functionality
                          Example C310.4: Flexible hybrid arrangement
                          Are rights to use unspecified (when-and-if available) additional
Q&A C320                  software products and an initial software license(s) distinct from
                          each other in a software licensing arrangement?
                          Example C320.1: Contract with rights to unspecified
                          additional software products
                          Example C320.2: Non-distinct unspecified update/upgrade and
                          additional software product rights
                          Are the considerations as to whether promised SaaS and a right
Q&A C330                  to access unspecified additional software products as a service
                          distinct from each other different from those in a software
                          licensing arrangement?




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              138
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Q&A C340                  Are specified upgrades and rights to specified additional
                          software products additional promised goods in a contract with
                          a customer? If so, are they distinct from the other goods or
                          services in the contract?
                          Example C340.1: Implicit specified upgrade
Q&A C350                  If a SaaS provider makes a promise to a customer to add
                          functionalities or features to its SaaS, is that an additional
                          promised service in the contract with the customer? If so, is
                          that promised service distinct from the original SaaS service?
                          Example C350.1: Additional SaaS features/functionalities not
                          accounted for as an additional promise to the customer
Q&A C360                  Should a platform transfer right be accounted for as an
                          additional promise to the customer or as a right to exchange
                          software licenses?
                          Example C360.1: Platform transfer rights
                          Example C360.2: Unspecified platform transfer rights
Q&A C370                  Is a sunset clause included in a contract with a customer a
                          promised good or service? If so, is it distinct?
Customer options
Q&A C380                  Are usage (or transaction) based fees in a software licensing
                          arrangement variable consideration or an ‘optional purchase’?
Q&A C385                  Are usage (or transaction) based fees in a SaaS arrangement
                          variable consideration or an ‘optional purchase’?
                          Example C385.1: SaaS usage based fees
Q&A C390                  Is a provision permitting a customer to obtain additional copies
                          of a software product subject to the customer option guidance
                          or does it describe a usage-based royalty?
                          Example C390.1: Option to acquire additional licenses vs
                          usage-based fee
                          Example C390.2: User-based provision that is a usage-based
                          fee
                          Example C390.3: Metric-based provision
Q&A C400                  Is a provision permitting a customer to add users (or seats) to
                          a SaaS subscription a customer option or variable
                          consideration?
                          Example C400.1: SaaS user based fees
Q&A C410                  Are renewal options for services promised goods or services in
                          a contract?
                          Example C410.1: SaaS renewal option
Q&A C411                  Is a retroactive discount earned once a customer has
                          completed a specified volume of optional purchases subject to
                          the guidance on material rights?



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              139
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Q&A C412                  Is a prospective discount earned once a customer has
                          completed a specified volume of optional purchases subject to
                          the guidance on material rights?
Q&A C413                  Does the practical expedient for immaterial promises apply to
                          customer options?
Q&A C420                  When assessing the amount of an incremental discount offered
                          to a customer, should the entity look to the high-end of any
                          “range of discounts typically given for those goods or services
                          to that ‘class of customer’ in that geographical area or market”,
                          to the midpoint of that range or the median, or some other
                          amount such as the mean?
Q&A C430                  How should an entity evaluate if an option provides the
                          customer with a material right when the stand-alone selling
                          price of the good or service subject to the option is highly
                          variable or uncertain?
                          Example C430.1: Evaluating whether an option for a good or
                          service with a highly variable stand-alone selling price grants a
                          material right to the customer
Q&A C440                  Does a customer option to convert a term software license into
                          a perpetual license represent an additional promised good or
                          service in the contract?
Q&A C450                  Does a discount need to be significant in addition to being
                          incremental to the range of discounts typically offered to similar
                          customers for it to represent a material right?
Q&A C460                  How does an entity determine if a discount is incremental to
                          discounts offered to a similar class of customers?
Q&A C470                  Is the evaluation of whether a customer option is a material
                          right only quantitative in nature?
Q&A C480                  How does an entity determine whether a prospective discount
                          based on a customer completing a specified volume of optional
                          purchases is a material right?
Q&A C490                  Does an option to purchase goods or services for less than
                          stand-alone selling price without any other purchases represent
                          a material right?
                          Example C490.1: Discounted pricing not a material right




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              140
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




        Step 1                    Step 2                     Step 3                    Step 4                    Step 5


                                Identify                  Determine                 Allocate the
     Identify the                                                                                              Recognize
                              performance                 transaction               transaction
       contract                                                                                                 revenue
                               obligations                   price                      price




Identify the promised goods and services

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Promises in Contracts with Customers
25-16 A contract with a customer generally explicitly states the goods or
services that an entity promises to transfer to a customer. However, the
promised goods and services identified in a contract with a customer may not
be limited to the goods or services that are explicitly stated in that contract.
This is because a contract with a customer also may include promises that are
implied by an entity’s customary business practices, published policies, or
specific statements if, at the time of entering into the contract, those promises
create a reasonable expectation of the customer that the entity will transfer a
good or service to the customer.
25-16A An entity is not required to assess whether promised goods or
services are performance obligations if they are immaterial in the context of
the contract with the customer. If the revenue related to a performance
obligation that includes goods or services that are immaterial in the context of
the contract is recognized before those immaterial goods or services are
transferred to the customer, then the related costs to transfer those goods or
services shall be accrued.
25-16B An entity shall not apply the guidance in paragraph 606-10-25-16A to a
customer option to acquire additional goods or services that provides the
customer with a material right, in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-55-41
through 55-45.
25-17 Promised goods or services do not include activities that an entity must
undertake to fulfill a contract unless those activities transfer a good or service
to a customer. For example, a services provider may need to perform various
administrative tasks to set up a contract. The performance of those tasks does
not transfer a service to the customer as the tasks are performed. Therefore,
those setup activities are not promised goods or services in the contract with
the customer.
25-18 Depending on the contract, promised goods or services may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
a.     Sale of goods produced by an entity (for example, inventory of a
       manufacturer)




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              141
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




b. Resale of goods purchased by an entity (for example, merchandise of a
   retailer)
c. Resale of rights to goods or services purchased by an entity (for example,
   a ticket resold by an entity acting as a principal, as described in
   paragraphs 606-10-55-36 through 55-40)
d. Performing a contractually agreed-upon task (or tasks) for a customer
e. Providing a service of standing ready to provide goods or services (for
   example, unspecified updates to software that are provided on a when-
   and-if-available basis) or of making goods or services available for a
   customer to use as and when the customer decides
f. Providing a service of arranging for another party to transfer goods or
   services to a customer (for example, acting as an agent of another party, as
   described in paragraphs 606-10-55-36 through 55-40)
g. Granting rights to goods or services to be provided in the future that a
   customer can resell or provide to its customer (for example, an entity
   selling a product to a retailer promises to transfer an additional good or
   service to an individual who purchases the product from the retailer)
h. Constructing, manufacturing, or developing an asset on behalf of a
   customer
i. Granting licenses (see paragraphs 606-10-55-54 through 55-6555-60 and
   paragraphs 606-10-55-62 through 55-65B)
Granting options to purchase additional goods or services (when those options
provide a customer with a material right, as described in paragraphs 606-10-55-
41 through 55-45).



                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Other Licensing Considerations
55-64 Contractual provisions that explicitly or implicitly require an entity to
transfer control of additional goods or services to a customer (for example, by
requiring the entity to transfer control of additional rights to use or rights to
access intellectual property that the customer does not already control) should
be distinguished from contractual provisions that explicitly or implicitly define
the attributes of a single promised license (for example, restrictions of time,
geographical region, or use). Attributes of a promised license define the
scope of a customer’s right to use or right to access the entity’s intellectual
property and, therefore, do not define whether the entity satisfies its
performance obligation at a point in time or over time and do not create an
obligation for the entity to transfer any additional rights to use or access its
intellectual property.
55-64A Guarantees provided by the entity that it has a valid patent to
intellectual property and that it will defend that patent from unauthorized use
do not affect whether a license provides a right to access the entity’s
intellectual property or a right to use the entity’s intellectual property. Similarly,
a promise to defend a patent right is not a promised good or service because it
provides assurance to the customer that the license transferred meets the
specifications of the license promised in the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              142
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




• • > Example 61B—Distinguishing Multiple Licenses from Attributes of a
Single License
55-399K On December 15, 20X0, an entity enters into a contract with a
customer that permits the customer to embed the entity’s functional
intellectual property in two classes of the customer’s consumer products
(Class 1 and Class 2) for five years beginning on January 1, 20X1. During the
first year of the license period, the customer is permitted to embed the entity’s
intellectual property only in Class 1. Beginning in Year 2 (that is, beginning on
January 1, 20X2), the customer is permitted to embed the entity’s intellectual
property in Class 2. There is no expectation that the entity will undertake
activities to change the functionality of the intellectual property during the
license period. There are no other promised goods or services in the contract.
The entity provides (or otherwise makes available —for example, makes
available for download) a copy of the intellectual property to the customer on
December 20, 20X0.
55-399L In identifying the goods and services promised to the customer in the
contract (in accordance with guidance in paragraphs 606-10-25-14 through 25-
18), the entity considers whether the contract grants the customer a single
promise, for which an attribute of the promised license is that during Year 1 of
the contract the customer is restricted from embedding the intellectual
property in the Class 2 consumer products), or two promises (that is, a license
for a right to embed the entity’s intellectual property in Class 1 for a five-year
period beginning on January 1, 20X1, and a right to embed the entity’s
intellectual property in Class 2 for a four-year period beginning on January 1,
20X2).
55-399M In making this assessment, the entity determines that the provision
in the contract stipulating that the right for the customer to embed the entity’s
intellectual property in Class 2 only commences one year after the right for the
customer to embed the entity’s intellectual property in Class 1 means that
after the customer can begin to use and benefit from its right to embed the
entity’s intellectual property in Class 1 on January 1, 20X1, the entity must still
fulfill a second promise to transfer an additional right to use the licensed
intellectual property (that is, the entity must still fulfill its promise to grant the
customer the right to embed the entity’s intellectual property in Class 2). The
entity does not transfer control of the right to embed the entity’s intellectual
property in Class 2 before the customer can begin to use and benefit from that
right on January 1, 20X2.
55-399N The entity then concludes that the first promise (the right to embed
the entity’s intellectual property in Class 1) and the second promise (the right
to embed the entity’s intellectual property in Class 2) are distinct from each
other. The customer can benefit from each right on its own and independently
of the other. Therefore, each right is capable of being distinct in accordance
with paragraph 606-10-25-19(a)). In addition, the entity concludes that the
promise to transfer each license is separately identifiable (that is, each right
meets the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b)) on the basis of an evaluation
of the principle and the factors in paragraph 606-10-25-21. The entity concludes
that it is not providing any integration service with respect to the two rights
(that is, the two rights are not inputs to a combined output with functionality
that is different from the functionality provided by the licenses independently),
neither right significantly modifies or customizes the other, and the entity can



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              143
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




fulfill its promise to transfer each right to the customer independently of the
other (that is, the entity could transfer either right to the customer without
transferring the other). In addition, neither the Class 1 license nor the Class 2
license is integral to the customer’s ability to use or benefit from the other.
55-399O Because each right is distinct, they constitute separate performance
obligations. On the basis of the nature of the licensed intellectual property and
the fact that there is no expectation that the entity will undertake activities to
change the functionality of the intellectual property during the license period,
each promise to transfer one of the two licenses in this contract provides the
customer with a right to use the entity’s intellectual property and the entity’s
promise to transfer each license is, therefore, satisfied at a point in time. The
entity determines at what point in time to recognize the revenue allocable to
each performance obligation in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-55-58B
through 55-58C. Because a customer does not control a license until it can
begin to use and benefit from the rights conveyed, the entity recognizes
revenue allocated to the Class 1 license no earlier than January 1, 20X1, and
the revenue on the Class 2 license no earlier than January 1, 20X2.



                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Example 44—Warranties
55-309 An entity, a manufacturer, provides its customer with a warranty with
the purchase of a product. The warranty provides assurance that the product
complies with agreed-upon specifications and will operate as promised for one
year from the date of purchase. The contract also provides the customer with
the right to receive up to 20 hours of training services on how to operate the
product at no additional cost. The training services will help the customer
optimize its use of the product in a short time frame. Therefore, although the
training services are only for 20 hours and are not essential to the customer’s
ability to use the product, the entity determines that the training services are
material in the context of the contract on the basis of the facts and
circumstances of the arrangement.
55-310 The entity assesses the goods and services in the contract to
determine whether they are distinct and therefore give rise to separate
performance obligations.
55-311 The product and training services are each capable of being distinct in
accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-19(a) and 606-10-25-20 because the
customer can benefit from the product on its own without the training services
and can benefit from the training services together with the product that
already has been transferred by the entity. The entity regularly sells the product
separately without the training services.
55-312 The entity next assesses whether its promises to transfer the product
and to provide the training services are separately identifiable in accordance
with paragraphs 606-10-25-19(b) and 606-10-25-21. The entity does not provide
a significant service of integrating the training services with the product (see
paragraph 606-10-25-21(a)). The training services and product do not
significantly modify or customize each other (see paragraph 606-10-25-21(b)).



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              144
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




The product and the training services are not highly interdependent or highly
interrelated as described in paragraph 606-10-25-21(c). The entity would be
able to fulfill its promise to transfer the product independent of its efforts to
subsequently provide the training services and would be able to provide
training services to any customer that previously acquired its product.
Consequently, the entity concludes that its promise to transfer the product and
its promise to provide training services are not inputs to a combined item and,
therefore, are each separately identifiable.
55-313 The product and training services are each distinct in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-19 and therefore give rise to two separate performance
obligations.
55-314 Finally, the entity assesses the promise to provide a warranty and
observes that the warranty provides the customer with the assurance that the
product will function as intended for one year. The entity concludes, in
accordance with paragraphs 606-10-55-30 through 55-35, that the warranty
does not provide the customer with a good or service in addition to that
assurance and, therefore, the entity does not account for it as a performance
obligation. The entity accounts for the assurance-type warranty in accordance
with the requirements on product warranties in Subtopic 460-10.
55-315 As a result, the entity allocates the transaction price to the two
performance obligations (the product and the training services) and recognizes
revenue when (or as) those performance obligations are satisfied.


Step 2 of the revenue model requires an entity to identify the promised goods
or services in the contract with a customer, and then determine which are
separate ‘performance obligations’.
Therefore, the first task in applying this step of the revenue model is to identify
the goods or services promised in a contract with a customer. Such promises
can be explicit in the contract or implied based on the entity’s actions, including
its customary business practices, published policies, and other statements or
communications such that the customer has a reasonable expectation of
receiving those goods or services as a result of entering into the contract.
Promised goods or services in a contract with a customer also include explicit
or implicit promises to provide goods or services to the customer’s customers,
often referred to as sales incentives (e.g. a software entity that implicitly
promises, through its customary business practices, to provide technical
support or unspecified updates/upgrades to entities that purchase its software
from a reseller or distributor).
Promised goods or services do not include set-up activities or administrative
tasks that an entity will undertake to fulfill a contract unless those activities or
tasks transfer a good or service to the customer. Determining whether activities
required to fulfill a contract are promised services to the customer, rather than
administrative tasks/set-up activities, requires judgment based on the specific
nature of the activities. In general, administrative tasks (or set-up activities)
provide no incremental benefit to the customer beyond enabling that customer
to obtain a promised good or service – that is, the activities provide no value to
the customer separate from the promised good or service the activities permit
the customer to obtain, even if those activities are necessary for the customer
to obtain the good or service. For example, a software-as-a-service (SaaS)



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              145
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




provider may have to undertake activities at the outset of a SaaS arrangement
that provide no benefit or value to the customer other than enabling them to
access the online service (see Question C220). A strong indicator that activities
are not administrative tasks or set-up activities, but rather transfer a promised
good or service, is if another party provides those activities separately. If
another service provider sells those activities separately that would strongly
indicate the activities the entity is providing transfer a promised service to
the customer.
An entity is permitted, as a practical expedient, not to assess whether promised
goods or services are performance obligations if they are ‘immaterial in the
context of the contract with the customer’. An entity is not required to consider
whether promised goods or services that are immaterial in the context of the
contract are material in the aggregate. The evaluation of whether a promised
good or service is immaterial in the context of the contract considers both
quantitative and qualitative factors. If the revenue related to a performance
obligation that includes goods or services that are immaterial in the context of
the contract is recognized before those immaterial goods or services are
transferred to the customer, then the related costs to transfer those goods or
services are accrued when (or as) the revenue related to the performance
obligation that includes those immaterial goods or services is recognized.
Customer options (discussed in further detail before Question C380) that are
determined to provide the customer with a ‘material right’ cannot be deemed
immaterial in the context of the contract.
Even if goods or services are not immaterial in the context of the contract, an
entity may conclude that accounting for such goods or services are immaterial
to the financial statements taken as a whole, similar to the conclusion many
entities reach with respect to not capitalizing items of property, plant and
equipment below a certain threshold.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The concept of a ‘promised good or service’ in Topic 606 is similar (but not
necessarily identical) to the notion of a ‘deliverable’ under existing US GAAP –
although neither term is defined. Therefore, entities may evaluate whether an
item in a contract with a customer transfers a promised good or service
similarly to how they evaluate whether an item is a deliverable under legacy
US GAAP. In an SEC staff speech (Mark S. Barrysmith speech at the 2007
AICPA National Conference on Current SEC and PCAOB Developments), the
SEC staff noted that the following criteria are a helpful starting point in
determining, under legacy US GAAP, whether an item is a deliverable in
the arrangement:
1. the item is explicitly referred to as an obligation of the entity in a contractual
   arrangement;
2. the item requires a distinct action by the entity;
3. if the item is not completed, the entity would incur a significant contractual
   penalty; or




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              146
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




4. including or excluding the item from the arrangement would cause the
   arrangement fee to vary by more than an insignificant amount.
Implied promises/sales incentives
Applying Topic 606 should generally be consistent with the legacy US GAAP
software revenue recognition practice. That guidance required software entities
that provide technical support services to a reseller’s customer, or grant a
reseller the right to provide upgrades and enhancements to the reseller’s
customer, to account for those services as an implied deliverable in the
arrangement between the software entity and the reseller.
Administrative tasks/set-up activities
The notion of an administrative task exists in SEC guidance applied under
legacy US GAAP and refers to activities that do not represent discrete earnings
events – i.e. selling a membership, signing a contract, enrolling a customer,
activating telecommunications services or providing initial set-up services. That
SEC guidance distinguishes between deliverables and these activities. It states
that activities that do not represent discrete earnings events are typically
negotiated in conjunction with the pricing of the deliverables to the contract,
and that the customer generally views these non-deliverable activities as having
significantly lower or no value separate from the entity’s overall performance
under the contract.
In general, entities are unlikely to reach a substantially different conclusion under
the new standard when they attempt to identify administrative tasks or set-up
activities from the conclusion reached under the SEC guidance related to
identifying activities that do not represent discrete earnings events.
Promised goods or services that are ‘immaterial in the context of the
contract’
Legacy US GAAP provided that, in limited circumstances, revenue for a unit of
accounting could be recognized in its entirety even if the entity had a remaining
obligation, provided that remaining obligation was inconsequential or
perfunctory. An undelivered item was not inconsequential or perfunctory if it
was essential to the functionality of the delivered goods or services. Also,
activities were not inconsequential or perfunctory if the failure to complete the
activities would result in a full or partial refund or the customer’s right to reject
the delivered goods or services.
The assessment of whether a promised good or service is ‘immaterial in the
context of the contract’ includes both qualitative and quantitative factors,
including consideration of what may be important to the customer. Therefore,
we believe application of the ‘immaterial in the context of the contract’
guidance may be similar to the legacy US GAAP guidance on inconsequential or
perfunctory deliverables.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              147
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Determine which promised goods or services are
performance obligations

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Distinct Goods or Services
25-19 A good or service that is promised to a customer is distinct if both of the
following criteria are met:
a. The customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or
   together with other resources that are readily available to the customer
   (that is, the good or service is capable of being distinct).
b. The entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is
   separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (that is, the
   promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the
   contract).
25-20 A customer can benefit from a good or service in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-19(a) if the good or service could be used, consumed,
sold for an amount that is greater than scrap value, or otherwise held in a way
that generates economic benefits. For some goods or services, a customer
may be able to benefit from a good or service on its own. For other goods or
services, a customer may be able to benefit from the good or service only in
conjunction with other readily available resources. A readily available resource
is a good or service that is sold separately (by the entity or another entity) or a
resource that the customer has already obtained from the entity (including
goods or services that the entity will have already transferred to the customer
under the contract) or from other transactions or events. Various factors may
provide evidence that the customer can benefit from a good or service either
on its own or in conjunction with other readily available resources. For
example, the fact that the entity regularly sells a good or service separately
would indicate that a customer can benefit from the good or service on its own
or with other readily available resources.
25-21 In assessing whether an entity’s promises to transfer goods or services
to the customer are separately identifiable in accordance with paragraph 606-
10-25-19(b), the objective is to determine whether the nature of the promise,
within the context of the contract, is to transfer each of those goods or
services individually or, instead, to transfer a combined item or items to which
the promised goods or services are inputs. Factors that indicate that two or
more promises to transfer goods or services to a customer are not separately
identifiable include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. The entity provides a significant service of integrating the goods or
   services with other goods or services promised in the contract into a
   bundle of goods or services that represent the combined output or outputs
   for which the customer has contracted. In other words, the entity is using
   the goods or services as inputs to produce or deliver the combined output
   or outputs specified by the customer. A combined output or outputs might
   include more than one phase, element, or unit.
b. One or more of the goods or services significantly modifies or customizes,



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              148
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




       or are significantly modified or customized by, one or more of the other
       goods or services promised in the contract.
c.     The goods or services are highly interdependent or highly interrelated. In
       other words, each of the goods or services is significantly affected by one or
       more of the other goods or services in the contract. For example, in some
       cases, two or more goods or services are significantly affected by each other
       because the entity would not be able to fulfill its promise by transferring
       each of the goods or services independently.
25-22 If a promised good or service is not distinct, an entity shall combine that
good or service with other promised goods or services until it identifies a
bundle of goods or services that is distinct. In some cases, that would result in
the entity accounting for all the goods or services promised in a contract as a
single performance obligation.



                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Example 10—Goods and Services Are Not Distinct
• • • > Case C—Combined Item
55-140D An entity grants a customer a three-year term license to anti-virus
software and promises to provide the customer with when-and-if available
updates to that software during the license period. The entity frequently
provides updates that are critical to the continued utility of the software.
Without the updates, the customer’s ability to benefit from the software would
decline significantly during the three-year arrangement.
55-140E The entity concludes that the software and the updates are each
promised goods or services in the contract and are each capable of being
distinct in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19(a). The software and the
updates are capable of being distinct because the customer can derive
economic benefit from the software on its own throughout the license period
(that is, without the updates the software would still provide its original
functionality to the customer), while the customer can benefit from the
updates together with the software license transferred at the outset of
the contract.
55-140F The entity concludes that its promises to transfer the software license
and to provide the updates, when-and-if available, are not separately
identifiable (in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19(b)) because the license
and the updates are, in effect, inputs to a combined item (anti-virus protection)
in the contract. The updates significantly modify the functionality of the
software (that is, they permit the software to protect the customer from a
significant number of additional viruses that the software did not protect
against previously) and are integral to maintaining the utility of the software
license to the customer. Consequently, the license and updates fulfill a single
promise to the customer in the contract (a promise to provide protection from
computer viruses for three years). Therefore, in this Example, the entity
accounts for the software license and the when-and-if available updates as a
single performance obligation. In accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-33, the
entity concludes that the nature of the combined good or service it promised to



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              149
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




transfer to the customer in this Example is computer virus protection for three
years. The entity considers the nature of the combined good or service (that is,
to provide anti-virus protection for three years) in determining whether the
performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time in accordance
with paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-30 and in determining the
appropriate method for measuring progress toward complete satisfaction of
the performance obligation in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-31
through 25-37.
• • > Example 11—Determining Whether Goods or Services Are Distinct
• • • > Case A—Distinct Goods or Services
55-141 An entity, a software developer, enters into a contract with a customer
to transfer a software license, perform an installation service, and provide
unspecified software updates and technical support (online and telephone) for
a two-year period. The entity sells the license, installation service, and technical
support separately. The installation service includes changing the web screen
for each type of user (for example, marketing, inventory management, and
information technology). The installation service is routinely performed by other
entities and does not significantly modify the software. The software remains
functional without the updates and the technical support.
55-142 The entity assesses the goods and services promised to the customer
to determine which goods and services are distinct in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-19. The entity observes that the software is delivered
before the other goods and services and remains functional without the
updates and the technical support. The customer can benefit from the updates
together with the software license transferred at the outset of the contract.
Thus, the entity concludes that the customer can benefit from each of the
goods and services either on their own or together with the other goods and
services that are readily available and the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(a)
is met.
55-143 The entity also considers the principle and the factors in paragraph 606-
10-25-21 and determines that the promise to transfer each good and service to
the customer is separately identifiable from each of the other promises (thus,
the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b) is met). In reaching this
determination the entity considers that although it integrates the software into
the customer’s system, the installation services do not significantly affect the
customer’s ability to use and benefit from the software license because the
installation services are routine and can be obtained from alternate providers.
The software updates do not significantly affect the customer’s ability to use
and benefit from the software license because, in contrast with Example 10
(Case C), the software updates in this contract are not necessary to ensure
that the software maintains a high level of utility to the customer during the
license period. The entity further observes that none of the promised goods or
services significantly modify or customize one another and the entity is not
providing a significant service of integrating the software and the services into
a combined output. Lastly, the entity concludes that the software and the
services do not significantly affect each other and, therefore, are not highly
interdependent or highly interrelated because the entity would be able to fulfill
its promise to transfer the initial software license independent from its promise




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              150
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




to subsequently provide the installation service, software updates, or
technical support.
55-144 On the basis of this assessment, the entity identifies four performance
obligations in the contract for the following goods or services:
a.     The software license
b.     An installation service
c.     Software updates
d.     Technical support.
55-145 The entity applies paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-30 to determine
whether each of the performance obligations for the installation service,
software updates, and technical support are satisfied at a point in time or over
time. The entity also assesses the nature of the entity’s promise to transfer the
software license in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-55-59 through 55-60
and 606-10-55-62 through 55-64A (see Example 54 in paragraphs 606-10-55-
362 through 55-363B).
• • • > Case B—Significant Customization
55-146 The promised goods and services are the same as in Case A, except
that the contract specifies that, as part of the installation service, the software
is to be substantially customized to add significant new functionality to enable
the software to interface with other customized software applications used
by the customer. The customized installation service can be provided by
other entities.
55-147 The entity assesses the goods and services promised to the customer
to determine which goods and services are distinct in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-19. The entity first assesses whether the criterion in
paragraph 606-10-25-19(a) has been met. For the same reasons as in Case A,
the entity determines that the software license, installation, software updates,
and technical support each meet that criterion. The entity next assesses
whether the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b) has been met by evaluating
the principle and the factors in paragraph 606-10-25-21. The entity observes
that the terms of the contract result in a promise to provide a significant
service of integrating the licensed software into the existing software system
by performing a customized installation service as specified in the contract. In
other words, the entity is using the license and the customized installation
service as inputs to produce the combined output (that is, a functional and
integrated software system) specified in the contract (see paragraph 606-10-
25-21(a)). The software is significantly modified and customized by the service
(see paragraph 606-10-25-21(b)). Consequently, the entity determines that the
promise to transfer the license is not separately identifiable from the
customized installation service and, therefore, the criterion in paragraph 606-
10-25-19(b) is not met. Thus, the software license and the customized
installation service are not distinct.
55-148 On the basis of the same analysis as in Case A, the entity concludes
that the software updates and technical support are distinct from the other
promises in the contract.
55-149 On the basis of this assessment, the entity identifies three
performance obligations in the contract for the following goods or services:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              151
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




a. Software customization (which is comprised of the license to the software
   and the customized installation service)
b. Software updates
c. Technical support.
55-150 The entity applies paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-30 to determine
whether each performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time
and paragraphs 606-10-25-31 through 25-37 to measure progress toward
complete satisfaction of those performance obligations determined to be
satisfied over time. In applying those paragraphs to the software
customization, the entity considers that the customized software to which the
customer will have rights is functional intellectual property and that the
functionality of that software will not change during the license period as a
result of activities that do not transfer a good or service to the customer.
Therefore, the entity is providing a right to use the customized software.
Consequently, the software customization performance obligation is
completely satisfied upon completion of the customized installation service.
The entity considers the other specific facts and circumstances of the contract
in the context of the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-30 in
determining whether it should recognize revenue related to the single
software customization performance obligation as it performs the customized
installation service or at the point in time the customized software is
transferred to the customer.
• • > Example 55—License of Intellectual Property
55-364 An entity enters into a contract with a customer to license (for a period
of three years) intellectual property related to the design and production
processes for a good. The contract also specifies that the customer will obtain
any updates to that intellectual property for new designs or production
processes that may be developed by the entity. The updates are integral to the
customer’s ability to derive benefit from the license during the license period
because the intellectual property is used in an industry in which technologies
change rapidly.
55-365 The entity assesses the goods and services promised to the customer
to determine which goods and services are distinct in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-19. The entity determines that the customer can benefit
from (a) the license on its own without the updates and (b) the updates
together with the initial license. Although the benefit the customer can derive
from the license on its own (that is, without the updates) is limited because the
updates are integral to the customer’s ability to continue to use the intellectual
property in an industry in which technologies change rapidly, the license can be
used in a way that generates some economic benefits. Therefore, the criterion
in paragraph 606-10-25-19(a) is met for the license and the updates.
55-365A The fact that the benefit the customer can derive from the license on
its own (that is, without the updates) is limited (because the updates are
integral to the customer’s ability to continue to use the license in the rapidly
changing technological environment) also is considered in assessing whether
the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b) is met. Because the benefit that the
customer could obtain from the license over the three-year term without the
updates would be significantly limited, the entity’s promises to grant the
license and to provide the expected updates are, in effect, inputs that, together




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              152
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




fulfill a single promise to deliver a combined item to the customer. That is, the
nature of the entity’s promise in the contract is to provide ongoing access to
the entity’s intellectual property related to the design and production processes
for a good for the three-year term of the contract. The promises within that
combined item (that is, to grant the license and to provide when-and-if available
updates) are therefore not separately identifiable in accordance with the
criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b).
55-366 The nature of the combined good or service that the entity promised to
transfer to the customer is ongoing access to the entity’s intellectual property
related to the design and production processes for a good for the three-year
term of the contract. Based on this conclusion, the entity applies
paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-30 to determine whether the single
performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time and
paragraphs 606-10-25-31 through 25-37 to determine the appropriate method
for measuring progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance
obligation. The entity concludes that because the customer simultaneously
receives and consumes the benefits of the entity’s performance as it occurs,
the performance obligation is satisfied over time in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-27(a) and that a time-based input measure of progress is
appropriate because the entity expects, on the basis of its relevant history with
similar contracts, to expend efforts to develop and transfer updates to the
customer on a generally even basis throughout the three-year term.


After an entity has identified the ‘promised goods and services’ in the contract,
the entity then determines which such goods or services (either individually or
in combination with others) are ‘performance obligations’. The ‘performance
obligation’ is the ‘unit of account’ under Topic 606 – that is, an entity does not
account for the promised goods or services in the contract, it accounts for the
performance obligations.
A ‘performance obligation’ is either:
— a promised good or service (or bundle of promised goods or services) that
  is distinct; or
— a series of distinct goods or services that are substantially the same and
  meet both of the following criteria:
      —      Each distinct good or service in the series that the entity promises to
             transfer to the customer would be a performance obligation satisfied
             over time (see Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the
             entity satisfies a performance obligation).
      —      The same method would be used to measure the entity’s progress
             toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation to transfer
             each distinct good or service in the series to the customer (see
             Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies
             a performance obligation).
If a promised good or service is not distinct, it must be combined with another
distinct good or service (or distinct bundle of goods or services). Consequently,
even if a promised good or service is distinct, it may not be a separate
performance obligation if one or more other promised goods or services is (are)
not distinct. For example, if in a contract with a customer, Product A is




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              153
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




determined to be distinct, but Service B is not distinct and those are the only
two promised goods and services in the contract, Product A and Service B
would be accounted for as a single performance obligation.


Assessing whether a promised good or service (or
bundle of promised goods or services) is distinct
A promised good or service is distinct if both of the following criteria are met:

        Criterion 1:                                 Criterion 2:
      Capable of being                            Distinct within the
          distinct                              context of the contract
                                                                                                  If both criteria met:
 Can the customer benefit                       Is the entity’s promise to                       Distinct performance
 from the good or service                          transfer the good or                                obligation
   on its own or together                           service separately
     with other readily                           identifiable form other
   available resources?                         promises in the contract?

                                        No




                         Not distinct – combine
                         with other goods and
                                services



Good or service is capable of being distinct
A customer can benefit from a good or service if it can be used, consumed,
sold for an amount that is greater than scrap value or otherwise held in a way
that generates economic benefits.
A customer can benefit from a good or service on its own (i.e. it can be used,
consumed, sold for an amount other than scrap value or otherwise held in a
way that generates economic benefits) or in conjunction with either:
— other readily available resources that are either sold separately:
      —      by the entity, which includes services only sold separately in renewal
             periods – e.g. post-contract customer support (PCS) that is always sold
             initially with a software license, but sold separately in renewal periods;
             or SaaS that is always sold initially together with implementation
             services, but sold separately to existing customers in renewal periods;
             or
      —      by another entity;
— resources that the customer has already obtained from the entity – e.g. a
  good or service delivered upfront, such as a software license transferred
  upfront – or from other transactions or events.
The assessment of whether the customer can benefit from the goods or
services on its own should be based on the characteristics of the goods or
services themselves instead of the way in which the customer may use the
goods or services, and the fact that a good or service is regularly sold separately




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              154
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




by the entity is a strong indicator that the customer can benefit from a good or
service on its own or with other readily available resources.
Contractual restrictions affecting either the customer’s ability to derive benefit
from the good or service on its own (e.g. a restriction on use or resale of a
good) or the customer’s ability to access a readily available resource (e.g. a
prohibition against the customer obtaining implementation from an available
alternative provider) would not affect the entity’s evaluation of whether the
good or service is capable of being distinct – that is, the evaluation ignores the
contractual restriction. Importantly, this is also the case when considering the
second distinct criterion (i.e. whether the entity’s promises to the customer in
the contract are separately identifiable).

The entity’s promises to transfer the goods or services in the
contract are ‘separately identifiable’
The objective when assessing whether an entity’s promises to transfer goods
or services are separately identifiable (i.e. distinct within the context of the
contract) is to determine whether the nature of the entity’s overall promise to
the customer is to transfer each of those promised goods or services
individually or, instead, to transfer a combined item (or items) to which the
promised goods or services are inputs.
Topic 606 provides the following indicators that two or more promises to
transfer goods or services to a customer are not separately identifiable.
— The entity provides a significant service of integrating the goods or services
  with other goods or services promised in the contract into a bundle of
  goods or services that represent the combined output or outputs for which
  the customer has contracted. This occurs when the entity is using the
  goods or services as inputs to produce or deliver the output or outputs
  specified by the customer. A combined output (or outputs) might include
  more than one phase, element or unit.
— One or more of the goods or services significantly modifies or customizes,
  or is significantly modified or customized by, one or more of the other
  goods or services promised in the contract.
— The goods or services are highly interdependent or highly interrelated, such
  that each of the goods or services is significantly affected by one or more
  of the other goods or services. For example, in some cases, two or more
  goods or services are significantly affected by each other because the
  entity would not be able to fulfill its promise by transferring each of the
  goods or services independently.
The indicators are not an exhaustive list and are not intended to be evaluated as
criteria or to be considered in isolation from the principle that they support.
Entities should evaluate whether the nature of the entity’s promise to the
customer within the context of the contract is to transfer (a) multiple goods or
services (i.e. multiple outputs) or (b) a combined item that is comprised of the
multiple promised goods or services in the contract (i.e. the individual promised
goods or services are inputs to the combined item). The indicators will be more
or less relevant to the evaluation depending on the nature of the contract, and
entities will likely attach more or less importance to a particular indicator
depending on the facts and circumstances (e.g. the first indicator may provide



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              155
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




more persuasive evidence in one contract, while the second or third provides
more persuasive evidence in another contract).
The Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2016-10 expands on the Board’s intent and
on the application of the separately identifiable principle. BC29 explains that an
entity’s promises to transfer two or more promised goods or services are not
separately identifiable when they will be used to create a combined item (or
items) that is more than, or different from, merely the aggregate (i.e. the sum)
of those component goods or services. BC32 further articulates that this refers
to each of the goods or services significantly affecting the other; two goods or
services should not be combined into a single performance obligation solely
because one good or service significantly affects, or depends upon, the other
(e.g. the fact that a maintenance or an installation service depends on the entity
transferring the equipment or the licensed software that will be maintained or
installed does not mean the entity’s promises to transfer the equipment or the
license and to provide the services are not separately identifiable).
Stated another way, we believe that the separately identifiable evaluation
hinges on whether the promised goods or services have a ‘transformative’
relationship on each other, rather than merely an ‘additive’ relationship to
each other.
Consistent with the discussion of ‘capable of being distinct’, Topic 606 provides
that the evaluation of whether an entity’s promises to transfer two or more
goods or services are separately identifiable looks at the nature of the goods or
services; contractual restrictions or requirements (e.g. to use the entity’s
services rather than an alternative provider’s services) do not affect the
separately identifiable evaluation.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The general legacy US GAAP separation model – applicable to software-as-a-
service, hardware and related deliverables – focused on the separability of the
delivered item (i.e. whether the delivered item had stand-alone value or a
general right of return existed relative to the delivered item) and did not require
an analysis of the remaining deliverables (e.g. whether the undelivered item(s)
had stand-alone value) at the time the delivered item was transferred to the
customer. If a delivered item in a contract with two deliverables met the
separation criteria, the remaining deliverable was accounted for separately
without evaluation of whether it met the separation criteria. If the contract
contained more than two deliverables, an evaluation of each item’s separability
occurred only when that item was delivered, without consideration of the
remaining undelivered items. In addition, the legacy guidance that prohibited
allocating contingent revenue to a delivered item, in most cases, had the
practical effect of allocating no revenue to a delivered item that had stand-alone
value (i.e. negating the effect of any separation conclusion).
Meanwhile, the legacy US GAAP separation model applicable to software and
software-related elements focused on the undelivered item(s) – i.e. a delivered
software license was only separable if the entity had vendor-specific objective
evidence of fair value (VSOE) for all of the undelivered items in the arrangement



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              156
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




(e.g. PCS, professional services, hosting services) and any professional
services in the arrangement were not essential to the functionality of the
delivered software.
Under Topic 606, all goods and services are required to either be distinct (i.e.
capable of being distinct and distinct within the context of the contract), and
therefore separate (unless the distinct goods or services meet the series
criteria), or grouped into bundles of goods and services that are distinct from
the remaining goods or services in the arrangement. The requirement to
establish that all of the promised goods or services in the contract are distinct
or to group them into distinct bundles may have an effect, as compared to
legacy US GAAP, on whether goods or services qualify for separate accounting
since separation depends on the characteristics of all the promised goods or
services in the contract rather than solely upon the characteristics of the item
that has been delivered in a non-software arrangement or upon the undelivered
items in a software licensing arrangement. For example, whether a software
license to Product A is distinct now depends on its characteristics as well as
those of any bundled services that are undelivered at the point in time the
software license is transferred to the customer, and whether SaaS Offering B is
distinct depends not only on its characteristics but also on those of the other
goods or services in the contract (e.g. whether Product B and Service C are also
distinct, either individually or as a bundle).
Topic 606 does not contain a contingent revenue ‘cap’. Therefore, separation of
goods or services under Topic 606 is not affected by such provisions in the
manner it could be under legacy US GAAP. With the elimination of the
contingent revenue ‘cap’ and the VSOE requirement for software
arrangements, Topic 606 could lead to more performance obligations (or units
of account) than was the case under legacy US GAAP.
Capable of being distinct
The ‘capable of being distinct’ criterion is similar, but not identical, to the stand-
alone value criterion required under legacy US GAAP. Specifically, under legacy
US GAAP, a delivered item had value on a stand-alone basis if it was sold
separately by any entity or if the customer could resell the delivered item on a
stand-alone basis (even in a hypothetical market).
Under Topic 606, an entity evaluates whether the customer can benefit from
the good or service on its own or together with other readily available
resources. This evaluation no longer depends entirely on whether the entity or
another entity sells an identical or largely interchangeable good or service
separately, or whether the delivered item can be resold by the customer.
Rather, whether the good or service is sold separately by the entity or another
entity or could be resold for more than scrap value are factors to consider in
evaluating whether the customer can benefit from the good or service on its
own. Factors beyond how the good or service is sold in the marketplace by the
entity or others, such as the stand-alone functional utility of the product or
service, are also considered in this evaluation.
Therefore, more promised goods and services may meet the capable of being
distinct criterion than meet the stand-alone value criterion in legacy US GAAP.
However, those goods or services must still meet the second, ‘separately
identifiable’ criterion in order to be distinct.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              157
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




‘Separately identifiable’ vs ‘Essential to the functionality’
Under Topic 606, an entity’s consideration of whether its promises to transfer a
software license and provide services are separately identifiable considers
whether the nature of the arrangement is for the entity to provide the software
license and services, or instead, to transfer a combined item (e.g. a customized
software application) that uses the software license and the entity’s services as
inputs to produce that combined item. Topic 606 states that the following
should be considered in making that determination (not all-inclusive, entities
should consider the overall principle):
— whether the entity is providing a significant integration service – that is, to
  combine the promised goods and services (the inputs) into the combined
  item (the output) for the customer;
— whether the services significantly modify or customize the licensed
  software; or
— whether the software license and the services are highly dependent on, or
  highly interrelated with, each other such that each significantly affects the
  other in the contract.
In contrast, when determining whether a software license and services
promised in a contract with a customer should be accounted for separately
under legacy US GAAP, an entity considered whether the service element is
essential to the functionality of the other elements in the arrangement,
including the software license. However, legacy US GAAP considered additional
factors, inherent to its risks and rewards model, in determining whether
software and related services should be considered a single unit of account. We
do not believe these additional factors would affect the question of separation
under Topic 606. These factors included whether:
— the timing of payments for the software was coincident with performance
  of the services;
— milestones or customer-specific acceptance criteria affecting the
  realizability of the software-license fee;
— the services carried a significant degree of risk or unique acceptance
  criteria;
— the entity was an experienced provider of the services.
In many circumstances, entities will come to similar separation conclusions
under Topic 606 as under legacy US GAAP; however, the conclusions reached
between ‘separately identifiable’ and ‘essential to the functionality’ may not
always be the same. For example, some entities may conclude that a software
license and services should be combined under Topic 606 (i.e. because they
are not separately identifiable) even though the services are not currently
considered essential to the software’s functionality. The converse is
also possible.
Effect of contractual restrictions/limitations
An SEC staff speech from 2009 (Arie S. Wilgenburg speech at the 2009 AICPA
National Conference on Current SEC and PCAOB Developments) stated that,
generally, separability of deliverables in a revenue arrangement should be
evaluated on the basis of the inherent nature of those deliverables, rather than
on specific restrictions in the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              158
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Topic 606 similarly looks to the inherent nature/characteristics of the goods or
services in evaluating whether a good or service is capable of being distinct and
whether an entity’s promises to transfer two or more goods or services are
separately identifiable. Contractual restrictions, therefore, do not affect
those evaluations.
VSOE no longer affects separability in software licensing arrangements
Under legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance, a delivered
item (e.g. a software license delivered upfront) was only accounted for as a
separate element of the arrangement if the software entity had VSOE for the
undelivered elements (e.g. PCS, professional services, hosting services, or any
specified update or specified additional software product). If the entity did not
have VSOE for all undelivered items, the delivered item (typically a software
license) was combined with the undelivered items and the revenue attributable
to those items was generally recognized either over the service period (e.g. in
the case of PCS or professional services) or at the point in time the undelivered
item was delivered (e.g. when a specified upgrade was delivered).
In contrast, under Topic 606, the presence or absence of VSOE has no effect on
whether two promised goods or services in a software licensing arrangement
are separate performance obligations. Because VSOE was often difficult to
establish under legacy US GAAP, the elimination of the VSOE requirement for
separation will generally result in more items in software licensing
arrangements being accounted for as separate performance obligations than are
accounted for as separate elements under the legacy guidance.



A series of distinct goods or services

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Identifying Performance Obligations
25-14 At contract inception, an entity shall assess the goods or services
promised in a contract with a customer and shall identify as a performance
obligation each promise to transfer to the customer either:
a. A good or service (or a bundle of goods or services) that is distinct
b. A series of distinct goods or services that are substantially the same and
   that have the same pattern of transfer to the customer (see paragraph 606-
   10-25-15).
25-15 A series of distinct goods or services has the same pattern of transfer to
the customer if both of the following criteria are met:
a. Each distinct good or service in the series that the entity promises to
   transfer to the customer would meet the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-27
   to be a performance obligation satisfied over time.
b. In accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-31 through 25-32, the same
   method would be used to measure the entity’s progress toward complete
   satisfaction of the performance obligation to transfer each distinct good or
   service in the series to the customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              159
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




• • > Example 12A—Series of Distinct Goods or Services
55-157B An entity, a hotel manager, enters into a contract with a customer to
manage a customer-owned property for 20 years. The entity receives
consideration monthly that is equal to 1 percent of the revenue from the
customer-owned property.
55-157C The entity evaluates the nature of its promise to the customer in this
contract and determines that its promise is to provide a hotel management
service. The service comprises various activities that may vary each day (for
example, cleaning services, reservation services, and property maintenance).
However, those tasks are activities to fulfill the hotel management service and
are not separate promises in the contract. The entity determines that each
increment of the promised service (for example, each day of the management
service) is distinct in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19. This is because
the customer can benefit from each increment of service on its own (that is, it
is capable of being distinct) and each increment of service is separately
identifiable because no day of service significantly modifies or customizes
another and no day of service significantly affects either the entity’s ability
to fulfill another day of service or the benefit to the customer of another day
of service.
55-157D The entity also evaluates whether it is providing a series of distinct
goods or services in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-14 through 25-15.
First, the entity determines that the services provided each day are
substantially the same. This is because the nature of the entity’s promise is the
same each day and the entity is providing the same overall management
service each day (although the underlying tasks or activities the entity performs
to provide that service may vary from day to day). The entity then determines
that the services have the same pattern of transfer to the customer because
both criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-15 are met. The entity determines that the
criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-15(a) is met because each distinct service
meets the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-27 to be a performance obligation
satisfied over time. The customer simultaneously receives and consumes the
benefits provided by the entity as it performs. The entity determines that the
criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-15(b) also is met because the same measure
of progress (in this case, a time-based output method) would be used to
measure the entity’s progress toward satisfying its promise to provide the
hotel management service each day.
55-157E After determining that the entity is providing a series of distinct daily
hotel management services over the 20-year management period, the entity
next determines the transaction price. The entity determines that the entire
amount of the consideration is variable consideration. The entity considers
whether the variable consideration may be allocated to one or more, but not all,
of the distinct days of service in the series in accordance with paragraph 606-
10-32-39(b). The entity evaluates the criteria in paragraph 606-10-32-40 and
determines that the terms of the variable consideration relate specifically to the
entity’s efforts to transfer each distinct daily service and that allocation of the
variable consideration earned based on the activities performed by the entity
each day to the distinct day in which those activities are performed is
consistent with the overall allocation objective. Therefore, as each distinct daily
service is completed, the variable consideration allocated to that period may be
recognized, subject to the constraint on variable consideration.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              160
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




A contract may contain a promise to transfer a series of distinct goods or
services that are substantially the same. For example, a two-year services
contract may consist of 24 monthly (or even 730 daily) service periods during
which the entity is providing the same service to the customer. At contract
inception, an entity assesses the goods or services promised in the contract
and determines whether there is a series of goods or services that is a single
performance obligation. This is the case when they meet the following criteria.

                                                                        The same method
                                    Each distinct good
                                                                        would be used to
                                     or service in the
    The goods or                                                        measure progress
                                         series is a                                                           A single
     services are                                                      toward satisfaction
                                       performance                                                           performance
   substantially the                                                     of each distinct
                                    obligation satisfied                                                      obligation
        same                                                            good or service in
                                         over time
                                                                            the series
                                     (see Chapter F)
                                                                         (see Chapter F)


Accounting for a series of distinct goods or services that meet the criteria as a
single performance obligation is not optional. If the series requirements are met
for a group of goods or services, then those items are treated as a single
performance obligation. Further, an entity is not permitted to account for a
single performance obligation comprising a series of distinct goods or services
in the same manner as a single performance obligation that comprises
nondistinct goods or services. For example, as noted below, variable
consideration could be allocated differently depending on whether the single
performance obligation is a series or not a series.
The criteria to determine whether the series guidance applies does not require
an assessment of the amount or timing of revenue that would have been
recognized in a period with or without the application of the series guidance.
[606-10-25-15, TRG Agenda Paper No. 27]

The series guidance was included in Topic 606 to simplify application of the
revenue model and to promote consistency in identifying performance
obligations. In particular, without this guidance some repetitive service
contracts may have been separated into multiple performance obligations (e.g.
delivering electricity or transaction processing). This would require an entity to
allocate consideration to each increment of service. For example, without the
series guidance, an entity may need to allocate consideration to each hour or
day of service in a cleaning service contract. [ASU 2014-09.BC114]


Determining the nature of the entity’s promise to the
customer is the first step in applying the series
guidance
Determining the nature of the entity’s promise to the customer is the first step
in determining whether the series guidance applies. For example, if the nature
of the promise is the delivery of a specified quantity of a good or service, then
the evaluation should consider whether each good or service is distinct and
substantially the same.
Conversely, if the nature of the entity’s promise is to stand-ready or to provide a
single service for a period of time (i.e. there is not a specified quantity of
activities to be performed, such as in the hotel management scenario illustrated




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              161
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




in Example 12A of Topic 606 – paragraphs 606-10-55-157B – 55-157E), then the
evaluation will typically focus on whether each time increment, rather than the
underlying fulfillment activities, is distinct and substantially the same. For
example, a three-year SaaS arrangement providing unlimited access (or a
defined quantity that is not substantive – e.g. because the customer is unlikely
to surpass the defined limit) will typically be viewed as a series of distinct
service periods (e.g. each day, week or month of the three-year arrangement)
that provide substantially the same service (i.e. continuous access to the
entity’s hosted application) each period. It will generally not be important that
the entity might undertake different activities with respect to the hosted
application or maintaining its data center each of those distinct service periods,
or that the customer may use the hosted application differently or in different
amounts each of those periods.
The TRG agreed that when the nature of the promise is to stand ready or
provide a single service for a period of time, the underlying activities could vary
significantly from day to day but the nature of the promise does not change
from day to day. The TRG specifically discussed arrangements such as hotel
management, transaction processing and IT outsourcing which had integrated
activities that formed a single performance obligation of which the nature of the
promise was a single service to the customer each day.
For example, in the hotel management service the activities required to fulfill
the contract could include management of the different hotel functions such as
training, procurement, reservations, etc. In that example, the underlying
activities could vary significantly within a day and from day to day; however,
the promise to the customer to manage the hotel is the same each day. [TRG
Agenda Paper No. 39]

Certain software-related services will also typically be a series of distinct service
periods. For example, technical support services and rights to unspecified
updates, upgrades and/or enhancements will typically constitute either a series
of distinct service periods (if those are determined to be ‘stand-ready
obligations’ – see Question C130) or a series of distinct individual services (if
not a ‘stand-ready obligation’). Hosting services provided with respect to
licensed software will also generally constitute a series of distinct
service periods.


Not necessary for goods or services to be provided
consecutively
To apply the series guidance, it is not necessary that the goods be delivered or
services performed consecutively over the contract period. There may be a gap
or an overlap in delivery or performance when the overall nature of the entity’s
promise is not a ‘stand-ready obligation’ (e.g. there will be gaps between
technical support calls or the provision of software updates), and this would not
affect the assessment of whether the series guidance applies. Although the
Boards specifically contemplated a consecutively delivered contract (e.g. a
repetitive service arrangement), they did not make this distinction a criterion for
applying the series guidance. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 27]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              162
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Identifying distinct goods or services as a series may
affect the allocation of variable consideration and the
accounting for contract modifications
Effect on variable consideration. Identifying a service obligation (such as a
SaaS arrangement) as a series of distinct service periods can significantly affect
the accounting for variable consideration in the contract. This is because, in
such cases, Topic 606 permits entities, if the criteria in paragraph 606-10-32-40
are also met (discussed in detail in Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction
price to the performance obligations in the contract), to allocate variable
consideration entirely to distinct service periods (e.g. each day, month, quarter
or year) within a single, series performance obligation – i.e. rather than to the
performance obligation as a whole. Therefore, if the consideration for a service
(e.g. a SaaS obligation) varies based on discrete activities in each distinct
service period (e.g. based on the customer’s use of the SaaS platform), the
entity may be able to allocate all of the variable fees attributable to those
activities to that distinct service period. In the absence of a conclusion that the
single service performance obligation is a series of distinct service periods and
meeting the variable consideration allocation criteria in paragraphs 606-10-32-39
through 32-40, entities will generally be required to estimate such fees for the
entire performance obligation period and true-up that estimate, as well as
revenue recognized to-date for the performance obligation as a whole,
throughout the overall service period (e.g. the three-year SaaS contract period).
Effect on contract modifications. A conclusion that a service obligation is a
series of distinct service periods, which will typically be the case for stand-ready
obligations, can also significantly affect the accounting for contract
modifications. This is because the contract modifications accounting model in
Topic 606 differs depending on whether the remaining goods or services to be
provided after a contract modification are or are not distinct from the goods or
services provided before the modification (rather than on whether they are
separate performance obligations). Consequently, the accounting for a
modification to a SaaS arrangement, or to a software licensing arrangement that
includes PCS or hosting services, will differ depending on whether the entity
concludes that the SaaS, or the PCS or hosting services, is a series of distinct
service periods (i.e. such that each period subsequent to the modification is
distinct from those preceding it).
Chapter G – Contract modifications provides further guidance on contract
modifications.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              163
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Questions & answers

                   Question C5
                   Does an entity apply the practical expedient for
                   immaterial goods or services on a contract-by-
                   contract basis?
Interpretive response: No, we believe entities should apply the practical
expedient to immaterial goods or services consistently to similar promises in
similar contracts.



                   Example C5.1
                   Goods or services immaterial in the context of the
                   contract – qualitative assessment
Software entity enters into a contract to provide Customer with software and
PCS. The contract also provides Customer with the right to receive up to 20
hours of training services on how to operate the software at no additional cost.
In evaluating the promises in the contract, Software entity determines that
although the promised training hours are not quantitatively significant, they
are not considered immaterial in the context of the contract for the
following reasons.
— The training services will allow Customer to optimize the software within a
  short period of time.
— Customer’s ability to optimize the software it is procuring is likely important
  to Customer.
Therefore, Software entity considers the software, PCS and training services as
promises in the arrangement. Software entity further assesses whether those
promises are distinct from one another and if so, accounts for them as separate
performance obligations. [606-10-55-309]



                  Question C10
                  Do restrictions as to time, geography and/or use
                  affect how many software licenses are promised to
                  the customer in the contract?
Interpretive response: It depends. Software licenses frequently include
restrictions as to time, geography and/or use of the software. For example, a
license may be for a period of time that is less than the economic life of the
software, for use only within one or more specified geographies (e.g. within the
United States or North America only), and/or may only permit specified uses of
the software (e.g. for use only in a specified class of product).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              164
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




In most cases, restrictions on a software license are attributes of the bundle of
rights that make up the license and do not create additional promises to transfer
licenses to the customer. However, in some cases, a restriction is substantively
a promise by the entity to grant additional rights to use the entity’s software
(i.e. one or more additional licenses) to the customer at a point in time later than
when the customer obtains control of an ‘initial’ license (i.e. initial rights to use
the entity’s software). The distinction arises because:
— a license is the contractual right to use (or right to access) IP, and not the IP
  itself; and
— the FASB decided that a customer does not control a license until it can
  begin to use and benefit from the rights conveyed by that license, even if a
  copy of the IP (e.g. the licensed software) has been provided – see Chapter
  F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
  performance obligation.
Therefore, it is not sufficient that an entity has delivered a copy of the licensed
software and the customer can begin to use and benefit from some rights to
use that software. If the entity has promised to grant additional rights to use
that software in the future (as illustrated in Scenario 2 of Example C10.1), the
entity still has one or more additional promises to fulfill. The fact that the entity
may not have to deliver any additional software to fulfill the additional promises
does not affect this conclusion.



                  Example C10.1
                  License restrictions
Scenario 1: Restrictions do not create an additional promise to the
customer
ABC Corp. grants Customer a three-year term license to use its software
beginning on January 1, 20X6. The terms of the license only permit Customer
to have 10 named users, to load the software on servers maintained in the
United States (for protective reasons related to the entity’s intellectual
property (IP)) and to use the software in the development of a particular class
of product (video game development). ABC makes available to Customer a copy
of the software and Customer’s rights to use the software commence on
January 1, 20X6.
Even though there are restrictions on this license (i.e. it is not perpetual,
worldwide or unlimited as to permitted uses of the software), those restrictions
represent attributes of a single license that is transferred to the customer on
January 1, 20X6 (January 1, 20X6 being the date that the customer can begin to
use and benefit from the rights granted). After the entity transfers control of the
license to the customer on January 1, there are no additional promised rights
remaining to be transferred – e.g. rights for the customer to use the software in
additional geographies or for additional uses, or to permit additional named
users to use the software. The customer controls all of the rights to use ABC’s
software that it will ever control under the contract as of that date.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              165
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Scenario 2: Restrictions are indicative of an additional promise to the
customer
In addition to the rights granted to Customer in Scenario 1, assume the contract
also provides that, beginning on January 1, 20X7 (i.e. one year after Customer
obtains controls of the rights granted in Scenario 1), either Customer is
permitted:
— 20 named users (an increase from 10 named users permitted as of
  January 1, 20X6); or
— to begin to use the software for the development of products in the field of
  consumer robotics (i.e. a different application from video game
  development).
In either case, ABC must grant additional rights to use its software on
January 1, 20X7 that Customer does not control before that date (i.e. from
January 1, 20X6 through December 31, 20X6).
Consequently, at contract inception, ABC has two promises to fulfill to
Customer:
— a promise to transfer a software license comprising the rights and attributes
  described in Scenario 1 on January 1, 20X6; and
— a second promise to transfer an additional license, comprising additional
  rights to use ABC’s software (i.e. 10 additional users or additional use
  rights), on January 1, 20X7.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The explicit distinction Topic 606 draws between the delivery of software and
the transfer of the rights to use the delivered software may appear new to
some that have not previously considered the right to use software separately
from the software itself. However, this notion that incremental rights to use
previously delivered software constitute an additional deliverable existed in the
legacy US GAAP software guidance on concessions (paragraphs 985-605-55-18
through 55-21). That guidance identified extending the geographic area in which
a reseller is allowed to sell the software, or the number of locations in which an
end user can use the software without commensurate additional consideration
as examples of a concession to a customer involving additional deliverables.



                   Question C15
                   Are promises to defend a patent, copyright or
                   trademark an administrative activity or a promised
                   good or service?
Interpretive response: An entity’s promise to defend its patent, copyright or
trademark is an administrative activity, not a promised good or service, because
it does not transfer goods or services to the customer. These types of activities




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              166
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




do not benefit the customer beyond the access to the good or service provided
in the contract and relate to the entity’s own assets. [606-10-55-64A]
In contrast, if an entity enters into a contract with a customer that is a named
defendant in a patent infringement lawsuit and agrees to provide legal support
to the customer rather than promising to defend its own patent, the entity may
be providing a legal service to the customer.



                   Question C16
                   Is an exclusivity provision a promised good or
                   service?

Interpretive response: Generally, no. Entities may enter into contracts with
customers that provide the customer with the exclusive right to the entity’s
goods or services, restrict the entity’s ability to sell its goods or services to
other customers or geographies, or both. For example, an entity might enter
into a software licensing contract with a distributor and agree not to sell its
products to the customer’s competitors or to provide the distributor the benefit
of being an ‘authorized dealer’ to use the entity’s trademarks in conjunction
with the sale of branded software licenses purchased from the entity.
The FASB discussed exclusivity clauses in the context of licenses of IP and
noted that exclusivity is another restriction that represents an attribute rather
than the nature of the underlying IP or the entity’s promise in granting a license.
Therefore, an entity does not separately account for exclusivity in a license
arrangement and the exclusivity does not affect whether that license is
transferred at a point in time or over time. [ASU 2014-09.BC412(b)]
Based on the above, we generally believe exclusivity is an attribute of the
promise to the customer rather than a promised good or service itself as it does
not change the nature of the underlying promise to the customer, which is to
provide the goods or services. Exclusivity may affect the value of or price for
the underlying good or service. However, the promised good or service is
typically what the customer will have the right to obtain or use.
In some cases, a customer may make a payment for the exclusivity or an
upfront payment upon entering into the exclusive arrangement. In that case, the
entity will need to evaluate whether the payment indicates that contract
includes a material right. A material right might be present if the contract
provides the customer with options to purchase additional goods or services
during the exclusivity period. If no material right is present, the payment would
be a part of the transaction price. See Question C410 and Question D20 on
evaluating upfront payments received from customers.
In some cases, the entity may pay the customer to enter into an exclusive
relationship. In that case, an entity will need to evaluate whether the payment is
for a distinct good or service or whether it should be accounted for as a
reduction of revenue. Similarly, an entity will need to evaluate whether the
payment meets the definition of an asset and should be capitalized and
amortized. See Question D370 on upfront payments to customers.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              167
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question C20
                  Are remix rights in a software contract an
                  additional promised good or service to the
                  customer?

  Remix rights
  Software arrangements may allow a user to change or alternate its use of
  multiple products/licenses (license mix) included in a license arrangement.
  The user has obtained the right under the arrangement to deploy and use at
  least one copy of each licensed product – i.e. the user has a license to use
  each delivered product and solely controls whether to change its license mix.
  The products may or may not be similar in functionality.
  These arrangements may allow the customer to use at any time any mix or
  combination of the products provided the cumulative value of all products in
  use does not exceed the total license fee. Certain of these arrangements
  may not limit usage of a product or products, but instead may limit the
  number of users that simultaneously can use the products (concurrent
  user pricing).


Interpretive response: No. The right to remix software licenses is not an
additional promised good or service. In contracts that include remix rights
(which are separate from any rights conveyed in the contract to specified or
unspecified future additional software products), the software subject to those
rights is delivered upfront and the customer has control over its rights to use
that software (e.g. number of seats or users and software products deployed).
Remix rights are, therefore, an attribute of the rights that the customer already
controls. There is no obligation left to fulfill on the part of the software entity
once the software subject to the remix rights is provided and the customer can
begin to use and benefit from its rights under the licenses.
Remix rights do not include the ability to remix into undelivered software
licenses (e.g. a software product that is not yet delivered or a right the
customer does not yet control, such as a right the customer will only have in
the future to use one of the delivered software products for an additional
purpose). For example, some remix arrangements permit the customer to remix
into future software products developed during the license period. In such
cases, the remix rights themselves are not an additional promised good or
service, but instead there is a specified or unspecified additional software
product right in the contract (see Question C320).
Remix rights are not equivalent to exchange or return rights because, when the
customer remixes, no software licenses are returned to the entity and no new
software licenses to previously undelivered software products are transferred
by the entity.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              168
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Accounting for remix rights under Topic 606 is consistent with the accounting
for those rights under legacy US GAAP.



                  Question C30
                  Is a contractual requirement to put the source code
                  of a software application into escrow a performance
                  obligation?
Interpretive response: It depends. To protect the customer in the event that a
software entity ceases operations, some licensing arrangements require the
entity to deliver the source code for the licensed software into an escrow
account. The customer obtains access to that code only in the event that the
software entity ceases operations. Those requirements are customary in
software licensing arrangements.
We believe that a standard escrow requirement for the licensed software’s
source code is a protective right to the customer rather than an additional
promised good or service in the contract, similar to other protective rights such
as a promise to defend a patent right with respect to the IP (see Question C15).
However, the specific terms of each contract should be evaluated, and unique
provisions could result in a different conclusion.



                  Question C40
                  When does a promise to transfer multiple copies of
                  a software product constitute a promise to transfer
                  multiple licenses?
Interpretive response: In general, we believe that a promise to transfer
multiple copies (whether characterized as users, seats or similar) of a software
product constitutes a promise to transfer multiple licenses if the customer’s
ability to make use of (or derive benefit from) the licensed software varies in
proportion to the number of copies transferred (see Example C40.1).
A further strong indicator of a multiple license arrangement is when the
consideration in the contract is proportional to the number of copies transferred
and is due and payable when the additional copies are transferred to the
customer.
In other cases, a promise to transfer multiple copies may not be a promise to
transfer multiple licenses – e.g. if the customer’s ability to make use of (or
derive benefit from) the software does not vary in proportion to the number of
copies transferred.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              169
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




If promise to transfer copies is not a promise to transfer multiple licenses
If a promise by the entity to transfer multiple copies of the licensed software
is not a promise to transfer multiple licenses (as for Customer B in
Example C40.2), it must then consider whether that promise to provide
copies of the licensed software either:
1. still represents a promise to produce and deliver additional copies of the
   licensed software; or
2. is solely a fulfillment activity that does not transfer any additional good or
   service to the customer (as described in paragraph 606-10-25-17) – i.e. the
   activity does not provide any substantive incremental benefit to the
   customer.
We believe that a promise to provide additional copies of licensed software falls
into category (2) only if both:
— the customer could make the additional copies without the entity’s
  participation – i.e. suggesting that the production and delivery of additional
  copies is effectively a convenience to the customer; and
— the costs to produce and deliver the additional copies is largely nominal. A
  greater cost would suggest that the entity’s promise to transfer the
  additional copies provides a service to the customer.
If either of these criteria is not met, we believe that the promise to provide
additional copies of the licensed software is providing a service to the customer
– i.e. it falls into category (1).
There may be circumstances in which the entity concludes that a promised
service of producing and delivering additional copies is immaterial in the context
of the contract. [606-10-25-16A]
Concluding that a promised good or service is immaterial in the context of the
contract involves consideration of both quantitative and qualitative factors.
Consequently, a promised service of providing additional copies may not be
immaterial in the context of the contract, even if the cost of producing the
additional copies is nominal. This will depend on the importance to the
customer of those additional copies and the customer’s ability to produce the
copies itself. If the customer needs those copies to make effective use of the
software and cannot produce those copies itself, that may suggest the entity’s
promised service to provide those copies is not qualitatively immaterial in the
context of the contract.
Question C390 discusses a related question about whether an option to acquire
additional copies of licensed software (including rights to additional seats, users
or similar) is an option to acquire additional software licenses or a usage-based
variable fee.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              170
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




  Site license
  A site license is a license that permits a customer to use either specified or
  unlimited numbers of copies of a software product either, throughout the
  company or at a specified location. For arrangements involving site licenses,
  the licensing fee is payable regardless of the number of copies requested by
  the customer.
  Multiple single license arrangements
  For arrangements that involve multiple single licenses, the licensing fee is a
  function of the number of copies delivered to, made by, or deployed by the
  user or reseller. The licensing fee is not due and payable until the copies of
  the software are delivered to or made by the customer.




                  Example C40.1
                  Multiple copies are multiple licenses
Assume that a single copy of software product G either enables a customer
to process 100,000 transactions or operate 10 customer locations, and that
five copies of product G would enable that same customer to process
500,000 transactions or operate 50 customer locations.
In this example, a customer’s processing capacity (i.e. its ability to derive
benefit from the use of product G) is a function of the number of copies
transferred. Therefore, an arrangement to provide 5 copies would be
considered a contract to transfer 5 licenses to the customer.



                  Example C40.2
                  Multiple copies are not multiple licenses
Two comparable customers (Customer A and Customer B) enter into the same
licensing arrangement to use an entity’s accounting software on a worldwide
basis. Each customer is permitted as many copies of the software as it
deems necessary.
— Customer A’s accounting staff work at one central location, and therefore
  only one copy of the software is necessary.
— Customer B’s similar number of accounting staff are distributed at several
  regional locations, and multiple copies of the software are required for
  Customer B to load on its servers at each location.
The customers’ ability to use the software for their respective accounting
activities is not affected by the number of copies of the software delivered to
the customer. Customer A’s one copy will permit Customer A to perform the
same volume of accounting as Customer B’s multiple copies.
In this example, the nature of the arrangement is not different (one license
versus multiple licenses) solely because Customer B has made a decision,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              171
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




unrelated to the capabilities of the software, to have a distributed
accounting function.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, entities generally categorized arrangements as either
for a site license or for multiple single licenses. The key distinction was whether
“the licensing fee is a function of the number of copies delivered to, made by,
or deployed by the user or reseller.” If so, the arrangement was for multiple
licenses rather than a site license.
The guidance in Topic 606 is not linked to the payment provisions in the
contract. However, it is similar with respect to linking the single versus multiple
license question to whether the customer’s ability to make use of the licensed
software varies in proportion to the number of copies/seats/users licensed. In
practice, most multiple single license arrangements have fees that are a
function of the number of copies/seats/users delivered to, made by or
deployed.



                  Question C50
                  Is a promise to provide appropriate end-user
                  documentation a promise to transfer a good to the
                  customer?
Interpretive response: In general, no. We believe that providing end-user
documentation (e.g. training manuals) is an administrative task if that
documentation merely pertains to instructing the customer on how to obtain
the inherent utility of the software (or SaaS). In that case, the end-user
documentation does not provide incremental benefit to the customer, and
therefore is not an additional promised good in the contract.
The end-user documentation might be necessary for the customer to begin to
use and benefit from the software – i.e. the customer cannot make substantive
use of the software without the documentation, and there are no alternative
resources available that would allow the customer to make substantive use of
the software (such as consultants or third-party documentation). In that case,
the entity may conclude that the license has not been transferred to the
customer until the documentation has been provided.
Providing standard end-user documentation should be distinguished from a
promise to provide additional materials that would provide incremental benefit
to the customer. One example is information of a consulting nature that helps
the customer do more than simply achieve the core utility from the software or
the SaaS.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              172
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question C60
                  Is a software entity’s participation in a joint steering
                  committee (JSC) considered a promised service in a
                  contract with a customer?
Interpretive response: It depends. JSCs are often created through
collaborative R&D agreements to ensure that all the parties are working to
achieve the goals of the activity. For example, an entity may license its software
to another software vendor or original equipment manufacturer (OEM), and
agree to provide R&D services to develop technology that will benefit sales of
both parties’ products. As part of this arrangement, the entity may agree to
participate with the other party on a joint development steering committee.
Topic 606 explicitly excludes from its scope contracts, or portions of a contract,
that are with a collaborator or partner that are not customers, but rather share
with the entity the risks and benefits of developing a product to be marketed.
Therefore, it is important for an entity that engages in collaborative
arrangements to analyze whether the other parties in its contracts are
customers – i.e. a party that has contracted with the entity to obtain goods or
services that are an output of the entity’s ordinary activities. For further
discussion on whether an arrangement is a collaboration, see Chapter A –
Scope.
When an entity agrees to participate in a JSC in a contract with a customer, it
should evaluate the substance of the contractual provision relative to JSC
participation. If participation in a JSC is required under the contract with the
customer, that participation is generally an additional promised service.
However, if participation in the JSC is permitted but not required, JSC
participation may not be an additional promised service in the contract, but
rather a right of the entity to protect its own interest in the arrangement.
The presence of any of the following factors generally indicates that
participation on the JSC is a promised service in the contract, rather than solely
a protective or participating right of the entity:
— participation requires specific action by the entity – e.g. specific persons
  with unique skills that are significant to the project or a specific time
  commitment;
— failure to perform would result in a substantive penalty for the entity; and/or
— the inclusion or exclusion of the JSC participation from the contract would
  significantly affect the other terms of the contract (e.g. the transaction
  price, timing of payments or customer acceptance).
Promised goods and services in a contract do not have to be explicit contractual
requirements, but rather can be implied promises that a customer would
reasonably expect the entity to perform based on the entity’s customary
business practices and policies. As such, entities may need to evaluate their
customary business practices and policies with respect to JSC participation to
determine whether JSC participation is implied, even if the contract is silent or
where such participation is optional in accordance with the terms of the
contract. [606-10-25-16]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              173
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

In general, the accounting for JSCs is similar to legacy US GAAP.
However, both the timing of revenue recognition and allocation of the
transaction price may be significantly different for contracts that include the sale
or licensing of software. Legacy US GAAP required vendor specific observable
evidence of fair value (VSOE) of all undelivered elements in order to separate
the elements in the arrangement; this included any JSC participation that was
determined to be a deliverable. If the entity did not have VSOE for its JSC
participation, this often resulted in recognition of the combined arrangement
fees over the JSC participation period.
Under Topic 606, if the JSC is determined to be a performance obligation, a
portion of the transaction price is allocated to the JSC participation based on the
relative stand-alone selling price of the JSC participation, without regard to
whether VSOE exists for the JSC participation.
In addition, the relative stand-alone selling price allocation to the various
performance obligations in the contract that includes JSC participation (e.g. a
software license, other professional services) may differ from the allocation that
would result from applying legacy US GAAP. For a discussion of allocation
issues, see Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the
performance obligations in the contract.



                  Question C70
                  Is a customer’s right to return a product or a right
                  to a refund for services a performance obligation?

Interpretive response: Typically, no. Paragraph 606-10-55-24 states “an
entity’s promise to stand ready to accept product returns should not be
accounted for as a performance obligation in addition to the obligation to
provide a refund.” Paragraph 606-10-55-23 addresses the accounting for returns
and includes “transfer of products with a right of return (and some services that
are provided subject to a refund)” in the scope of that guidance.
An obligation to accept product returns or to provide refunds (whether in the
form of cash or credit toward future products or services) for services (including
SaaS) is not a performance obligation other than as discussed in Question C80
pertaining to certain situations where a customer has the right to exercise a
return right an unlimited number of times. Instead, rights of return or refund are
treated as variable consideration, regardless of whether the customer is entitled
to a cash refund as a result of the return or, instead, is only entitled to a credit
toward future purchases from the entity. Therefore, estimated returns normally
should be considered by the entity in determining the transaction price of the
contract. [606-10-55-23 – 55-24]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              174
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy US GAAP allowed entities to recognize the sale of products subject to a
right of return when risks and rewards of ownership had passed to the
customer and the amount of future returns could be reasonably estimated,
among other criteria. Sales revenue (and cost of sales) that was not recognized
at the time of sale – because the amount of future returns could not be
reasonably estimated – was recognized at the earlier of the return right expiring,
or the criteria related to making a reasonable estimate of returns being met.
The guidance under legacy US GAAP applied to products only, and not to
services. However, SEC guidance allowed entities to analogize to the product
right of return guidance with respect to services in limited circumstances.
The Topic 606 approach of adjusting revenue for the expected level of returns
and recognizing a refund liability is broadly similar to the legacy guidance when
the entity can make a reasonable estimate of the returns. However, the detailed
methodology for estimating revenue may be different.
The Topic 606 methodology requires the use of either the expected value or
most likely amount method to determine the expected returns, depending on
which better predicts the consideration to which the entity will be entitled. After
an estimate of expected returns is made, the entity assesses whether it is
probable that using that estimate would not result in a significant revenue
reversal and, if not, the amount of revenue to be recognized is constrained. The
variable consideration constraint is designed so that most adjustments to
revenue occur upward (i.e. are increases to revenue). Because legacy US GAAP
only required future returns to be reasonably estimable, entities often recorded
upward and downward adjustments to revenue as a result of the right of
return guidance.
Although revenue could conceivably be constrained to zero under Topic 606, it
is likely that most entities will have sufficient information to recognize
consideration for an amount greater than zero even when they would not be
able to ‘reasonably estimate’ returns under legacy US GAAP. This is because
revenue is recognized to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal
in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not
occur and recognition does not necessarily default to zero (as happened under
legacy US GAAP when a reasonable estimate of returns could not be made). As
a consequence, entities that are unable to make a reasonable estimate of
returns may recognize some amount of revenue sooner under Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              175
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question C80
                  Under what circumstances is the right to exchange
                  one or more software licenses for one or more
                  alternative licenses considered an additional
                  performance obligation?
Background: The question addresses a customer’s right to exchange a license
to one software product for a license to another software product. Question
C85 addresses a customer’s right to convert a software license to the same
software on a SaaS basis.
Interpretive response: The determination of whether an exchange right should
be accounted for as a right to obtain additional software licenses is generally
based on whether the customer is contractually entitled to continue using the
originally delivered software.
Customer retains the right to use the originally transferred software
If the contract permits the customer to continue using the original software
license, the exchange right is accounted for as a right to obtain an additional
software license. This is because the customer is entitled to two licenses rather
than one, which should be evaluated in the same manner as any other
customer option to acquire a software license (see Questions C380 to C490).
If the customer does not have to pay a fee (or only has to pay a nominal fee to
obtain the additional software license – e.g. the cost of shipping a CD
containing additional software, if the license is to an additional software
product), or has the option to acquire the additional software license for a fee
that is substantially discounted from its stand-alone selling price, then that right
is a ‘material right’ and constitutes a performance obligation in the contract –
i.e. in addition to the initial promised software license.
Customer is not entitled to continue using the originally transferred
software
Right to exchange for a software license that has no more than minimal
differences in price, functionality or features
Under Topic 606, rights to exchange one product for another of the same type,
quality, condition and price are not considered returns or additional promised
goods in the contract. Therefore, the right to exchange one software license for
another that has no more than minimal differences in price, functionality or
features is neither a return right nor a right to an additional software license.
Therefore, it should be accounted for as a like-kind exchange, which will have
no effect on the revenue recognition related to the transferred license.
A license is a right to use software; it is not the software itself. Therefore, a
license does not necessarily have no more than minimal differences in price,
functionality or features solely because the license the customer will receive in
exchange grants the customer rights to use the same software product as the
initial software license. For example, a right to exchange a limited license to
software product X (e.g. limited as to geography or use) for an unlimited license
or a license with substantially different limitations (e.g. different or expanded




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              176
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




geography or use rights) also to software product X is a license with more than
minimal differences in price, functionality or features.
Right to exchange for a software license that has more than minimal
differences in price, functionality or features
Rights to exchange software licenses for dissimilar licenses (i.e. those with
more than minimal differences in price, functionality or features) are generally
accounted for as rights of return. In a situation where the license the customer
can exchange into is of significantly greater value (e.g. it provides significantly
more rights or is for a product with significantly more features or functionality),
and the customer is not required to pay commensurate additional consideration,
the right of return guidance would likely result in deferral of all (or substantially
all) the initial license fee until the exchange occurs or the likelihood of the
exchange becomes remote.
Topic 606 does not provide guidance about determining if two licenses have
more than minimal differences in price, functionality or features; therefore, the
comparison should be based on the relevant facts and circumstances on a case-
by-case basis. Further, it is important to remember that the promised good in a
software license arrangement is a license, and not the software itself.
Therefore, the determination does not depend solely on whether the license
being evaluated is for a different software product. A license for the same
software product may be significantly different in terms of the rights it conveys
to the customer.
Factors indicating that there may be more than minimal differences in price,
functionality or features between two software licenses may include the
following.
— The license to be received is for a software product that has a different
  name from the software product subject to the original license.
— Marketing materials for the software product to be licensed promote
  different functionality and features than the software product subject to the
  original license.
— The software product for which a license will be received operates outside
  the performance domain of the software product subject to the original
  license.
— In independent transactions, a license to the software product to be
  received is sold for a price significantly different from the original license.
— The license that will be received conveys to the customer substantive
  rights to use a previously delivered software product that it does not
  already control. For example, the license that will be received permits
  additional (or different) rights to use the software, such as the right to use
  the software in additional geographies or for additional uses.
Right to exchange for unspecified future software licenses
In general, rights to exchange software licenses for unspecified future software
licenses do not qualify for like-kind exchange accounting because it is not
possible to conclude that unspecified future licenses will have no more than
minimal differences in price, functionality or features from the original software
license. It may also be hard to conclude that an unspecified future license will




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              177
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




not provide significantly greater value to the customer than the initial license;
and therefore, may frequently result in deferral of all (or substantially all) the
initial license fee until the exchange occurs or the likelihood of the exchange
becomes remote.
Therefore, a right to exchange a software license for an unspecified software
license is generally accounted for as a right to return the initial software license.
Right to exchange for unspecified software licenses an unlimited number
of times
An unspecified software license exchange right (including a provision
characterized as a right of return under which the customer only obtains a credit
with which it can acquire additional software licenses from the entity) may be
exercisable an unlimited number of times over a specified period. In such
cases, we believe it may be appropriate for the entity to account for that right in
the same manner as a right to unspecified additional software licenses (see
Question C320) provided that the credit the customer obtains toward additional
software licenses decreases over the exchange right period in a manner
generally consistent with the customer’s consumption of its right to use the
originally licensed software.
This approach would not be appropriate if the customer can return the software
license for a full credit throughout the exchange right period because that
approach would result in recognition of revenue ahead of the entity’s
performance. Instead, the right of return guidance would apply.
It is also not appropriate under Topic 606 to account for the entire arrangement
that includes a right to exchange software an unlimited number of times as a
subscription, and therefore to recognize all of the arrangement revenue ratably
over the exchange right period, because such an approach would result in
failure to recognize revenue upon transfer of control of the initial license(s) to
the customer.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

End-user considerations
The guidance on accounting for rights to exchange one or more software licenses
for one or more alternative licenses is substantially similar to that under legacy US
GAAP, other than with respect to exchange rights that can be exercised an
unlimited number of times over a specified period or multiple times over a
significantly extended period (e.g. the entire economic life of the software or for
as long as the customer renews PCS). That is, under legacy US GAAP, exchange
rights of this nature resulted in the entire arrangement being accounted for as a
subscription (i.e. in those cases, the arrangement revenue would be recognized
ratably over the subscription period).
In contrast, under Topic 606, those arrangements will not be accounted for as
subscriptions. Rather, they will be accounted for as returns or, in some
circumstances, as an arrangement that includes a right to unspecified additional
software licenses, which results in a portion of the revenue recognized upon




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              178
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




the transfer of the initial license(s) and a portion of the revenue recognized as
the entity fulfills its obligation to provide unspecified additional software
licenses.
Reseller considerations
If software entities grant resellers the right to exchange unsold software for
other software (including software that runs on a different hardware platform or
operating system), such exchanges were accounted for as returns under legacy
US GAAP. This accounting, which included stock balancing arrangements, was
on the basis that the reseller is not the ultimate customer.
Accounting for such exchanges as returns was required even if the entities
required resellers to purchase additional software to exercise the exchange
rights. Exchange accounting was only considered appropriate when conducted
with the ultimate customer.
Topic 606 does not contain explicit guidance for exchange rights granted to
resellers. Therefore, we do not believe that exchange rights with resellers
would always be treated as return rights; instead, the criteria outlined above
would apply regardless of where the customer resides on the distribution chain.
Entities still have to consider other guidance in Topic 606 (e.g. on consignment
arrangements and the applicable transfer of control guidance, such as that in
paragraphs 606-10-55-58B – 55-58C for licenses of functional IP) to determine if
the reseller obtains control of the license to which the exchange rights apply.



                  Example C80.1
                  Right to exchange a software license
ABC Corp. enters into an arrangement with Customer to transfer a license to
Product A, a basic word processing software product, for a nonrefundable fee
of $500.
In addition, ABC grants Customer the right to exchange its Product A license for a
generally equivalent (in terms of rights conveyed to Customer) license to
Product B in six months when it is released. Product B is also a word processing
software product; it contains essentially the same basic features and functionality
of Product A except that Product B also contains a grammar-check feature that
permits the user to check the grammatical consistency of text. A license to
Product B is expected to be sold for $520 in separate transactions.
Customer is not entitled to continue using Product A if the Product A license is
exchanged for a license to Product B. Generally, a license to Product B would
not be considered to have more than minimal differences in price, functionality
or features from a license to Product A.
ABC concludes that the right to exchange the Product A license for a Product B
license is not an additional promised good or service in the contract. This is
because Customer will not retain the rights to use Product A if it exchanges the
Product A license for a Product B license.
ABC also concludes that the exchange right is not akin to a return because
Product A and Product B have no more than minimal differences in price,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              179
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




functionality or features and the rights conveyed by the two licenses are
generally equivalent. As a result, there is no accounting that must occur for the
exchange right.



                  Example C80.2
                  Right to exchange a software license for an
                  unspecified software license
ABC Corp. enters into an arrangement with Customer to transfer a license to
Product A for $1,000. In addition, ABC grants Customer the right to receive full
credit for the Product A license fee (i.e. no cash will be refunded) if Customer
returns that license, and instead licenses any product introduced by ABC in the
Product A family over a two-year period.
This return provision can be exercised only once and the estimated economic
life of the Product A software is five years. If the Product A license is returned,
Customer is no longer entitled to use Product A.
ABC concludes that it should account for the sale of the license to Product A as
a sale with a right of return. This is because it cannot conclude that the
unspecified software product for which Customer might obtain a license in
return for the Product A license would have only minimal differences in price,
functionality or features from Product A. The return right is not an additional
promised item in the contract because Customer does not retain the right to
use Product A if it is exercised. ABC does not expect based on its development
plan, within the two-year period to which the right applies, to develop any
software product within the Product A family that has significantly enhanced
features or functionality.
Therefore, ABC will recognize revenue for the sale of the Product A license
when the license is transferred to Customer. However, in accordance with the
guidance on product returns, the transaction price is subject to the guidance on
variable consideration, including the constraint on variable consideration. [606-10-
55-22 – 55-29]

ABC estimates the following based on relevant evidence (e.g. from similar past
offers and industry experience):
— that 40% of customers will exercise the right to exchange Product A;
— it is reasonably possible that up to 60% of customers will exercise the right;
  and
— it is remote that more than 60% of customers will exercise the right.
There are no costs to recover the license to Product A if it is returned and there
is no cost basis to the license.
Accordingly, when the Product A license is transferred to Customer, ABC will
recognize revenue of $400 (based on the reasonably possible returns of 60%).
It is probable that recognizing this amount will not result in a subsequent
significant revenue reversal when the uncertainty as to whether Customer will
return Product A is resolved.
The introduction of the constraint on variable consideration results in a different
outcome for this example than what would result under legacy US GAAP. This



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              180
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




is because, under legacy US GAAP, ABC uses its best estimate that 40% of
customers will exercise the right to exchange Product A. In contrast, under
Topic 606, ABC must constrain that estimate with the intent that it be probable
any subsequent adjustments are increases to revenue, rather than reversals.
Consequently, in contrast to the example above, under legacy US GAAP, ABC
would have:
— recognized revenue of $600 on delivery of Product A to Customer; and
— established a return reserve of $400 ($1,000 x 40%).



                  Example C80.3
                  Right to return software licenses in exchange for
                  credit toward unspecified software licenses
ABC Corp. enters into an arrangement with Customer to transfer five-year term
licenses to Products J, K, L and M. Customer has the right to return any of
those licenses for a credit toward the purchase of licenses to any other ABC
software products, including software products that do not yet exist at contract
inception or when Customer initiates a return. Customer is not entitled to a
cash refund under any circumstances and any return credit expires at the end of
the five-year license term. The amount of the credit to which Customer is
entitled declines during the license period (e.g. if Customer returns the
Product J license on Day 1, Customer will receive a full credit of the contractual
Product J license fee, but if Customer returns the Product J license at the end
of Year 1, it will receive a credit equal to 80% of the contractual license fee).
Customer is entitled to return any of the licenses to which it obtains rights in
the contract and can also return any licenses it obtains using a credit from the
exchange of another software license (e.g. Customer could exchange its
Product J license for a credit, which is used to acquire a license to Product Q
and then exchange the Product Q license for a credit that could be used to
acquire another license).
Customer’s return/exchange rights are unlimited and include rights to use
return/exchange credits for licenses to unspecified software products and the
amount of the available return/exchange credits decreases commensurate with
Customer’s consumption of its time-based rights to use the initially licensed
software. Therefore, ABC concludes that the return/exchange rights are akin to
a right to obtain future additional software licenses (see Question C320).
Assuming those rights are distinct, ABC allocates a portion of the transaction
price to those unspecified additional software license rights and recognizes that
revenue over the return/exchange rights period (in this case, the full five-year
license period). Because the return/exchange rights are unlimited and the
additional software licenses Customer can exchange into are unspecified, ABC
concludes that recognizing that revenue on a time-elapsed basis is appropriate,
consistent with the generally equal benefit Customer obtains from those rights
over the license period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              181
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question C85
                   How should a software vendor account for a right
                   to convert a software license to SaaS?

Background: A software vendor may enter into a contract to transfer a
software license that provides the customer the right to convert the software
license to a SaaS subscription for the same software. This question addresses
contracts where the right is present at contract inception, whether explicit or
implicit. See Question G131 and Example G131.1 for a discussion of
modifications that convert a license to SaaS, and Question G132 for a
discussion of modifications that add a right for the customer to convert a
license to SaaS in the future.
Interpretive response: The conversion right could be a marketing offer, a
material right, right of return or separate performance obligation depending on
the facts and circumstances.
Scenario 1: The customer retains the right to use the software
If the customer retains its previous right to use the software in addition to
obtaining access to the software on a SaaS basis, the contract provides the
customer with an option to acquire a service (i.e. the SaaS) in addition to the
software license. For example, a software vendor enters into a three-year term
license and provides the customer an option to acquire SaaS for the remaining
term while retaining its license. In this scenario, the software vendor must
evaluate whether the option is a material right.
If the customer does not have to pay a fee for the SaaS or the option price is at
a discount incremental to the range of discounts typically given for the SaaS to
that class of customer in that geographical area or market, then that right is a
‘material right’ and constitutes a performance obligation in the contract – i.e. in
addition to the initial promised software license. In contrast, when the price of
the SaaS is commensurate with the stand-alone selling price of the SaaS, the
right is generally accounted for as a marketing offer. See Questions C380 –
C490 for further discussion of material rights. [606-10-55-42]
Scenario 2: The customer forfeits the license upon conversion
If the customer forfeits the software license upon conversion, the conversion
right is generally accounted for as either (1) a right of return or (2) an optional
purchase that may be a material right. Under either approach, if the conversion
price would increase the contract price by an amount equal to or greater than
the stand-alone selling price of the SaaS, the conversion right is effectively just
a marketing offer. This is because the customer will have, in effect, paid a
substantive amount for both the software license and the SaaS if it converts
and, therefore, there is no implied refund or material right to account for.
Some believe a conversion right that is not a marketing offer is a right of return
because the license is a product that will be exchanged for the right to receive a
different service (i.e. the SaaS). Therefore, the item being forfeited is not of the
same type, quality, condition and price as the service it will receive in exchange.
Any discount from the stand-alone selling price of the SaaS in the conversion
price is effectively a refund of the license fee and is estimated using the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              182
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




variable consideration guidance. See C80 for further discussion on exchanges of
software licenses. [606-10-55-22 – 55-24]
Others believe that a conversion right that is not a marketing offer should be
accounted for as a material right. This is premised on a view that the conversion
right grants the customer the option to obtain an additional service at an
incremental discount from its stand-alone selling price rather than exchanging
one product for another product. The software vendor then accounts for the
material right in a manner consistent with the accounting for any other material
right, which includes deferring the relative stand-alone selling price allocated to
the material right until the underlying service is provided or the right expires.
[606-10-55-22 – 55-24]

Issue 2 of EITF Issue 19-B “Revenue Recognition – Contract Modifications of
Licenses of Intellectual Property” was added to the FASB agenda to address
diversity in practice in the accounting for the revocation of licensing rights
(including conversions of term software licenses to SaaS). The EITF discussed
both views as part of its deliberations but did not reach a consensus about
which of these views was acceptable or preferable.
In the absence of further guidance from the FASB or the SEC staff, we believe
either of the above-described views are acceptable.
An entity’s accounting under either view should reflect its history and
expectations related to conversions; some of the judgments involved may be
subjective in nature.
— The right of return approach results in revenue being deferred and adjusted
  each reporting period using the variable consideration guidance. Changed
  experience or expectations of customer conversions may affect the entity’s
  estimates of variable consideration over time. For example, if experience
  shows that customers are exercising the conversion option at a higher rate
  than previously expected, this would likely result in an increase to the
  amount of license revenue constrained and deferred by the entity when it
  transfers the license to the customer.
— The material right approach requires an estimated stand-alone selling price
  for the conversion right, which would incorporate the likelihood and timing
  of expected conversion. Unlike the right of return model, the stand-alone
  selling price of the material right is not adjusted after contract inception,
  and therefore the revenue deferred for the conversion option does not
  change before it is exercised (and the SaaS provided) or expires. However,
  the entity will need to update its stand-alone selling price estimates for
  conversion rights provided in new contracts to reflect changes in
  expectations about conversions.
Scenario 3: Flexible arrangement
In some contracts the customer is permitted a designated number of
concurrent users (e.g. 100 concurrent users), but the mix between on-premise
and SaaS users can vary over time. For example, the customer would be
permitted to have all 100 concurrent users accessing the on-premise software,
all 100 concurrent users accessing the software on a SaaS basis, or any mix in
between. These contracts consist of at least two promises, a software license
and SaaS that would be evaluated to determine whether they are distinct. See




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              183
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Example C310.4 for a scenario where the license and SaaS are distinct and
Question C310 on evaluating when a license and SaaS are distinct.



                  Question C90
                  How does a pattern of granting concessions to
                  customers in the form of free or significantly
                  discounted goods or services affect an entity’s
                  identification of the promised goods or services in
                  contracts with its customers?
Interpretive response: Promised goods or services include those implied by an
entity’s customary business practices, published policies or specific statements
if a customer would reasonably expect to obtain additional goods or services as
a result of entering into the contract with the entity. Therefore, an entity’s
historical pattern of giving customers free or significantly discounted goods or
services may create additional promised goods or services that an entity would
need to identify in a contract with the customer. This may include an implied
promise to deliver a good or service or an implied material right to obtain a good
or service at a significant discount.
The following are examples (not exhaustive) that may represent implied
promises, if a pattern exists of granting them to customers:
— providing discounted or free services or products that were not included in
  the terms of the original contract
— allowing the customer to access or receive additional products (including
  additional licenses) without a commensurate increase in the transaction
  price
— for time-based services, extending the time period for which a customer
  receives the service for little or no additional consideration
— extending the geographic area in which a customer can use a software
  license
— permitting additional uses of licensed software (if the license included use
  restrictions initially).
Price concessions do not affect the determination of the promised goods or
services in the contract. Price concessions expected at contract inception result
in the transaction price for the contract being variable (see Chapter D – Step 3:
Determine the transaction price).
Unexpected concessions, whether price concessions or additional good or
service concessions, are accounted for as contract modifications – e.g. as a
change to the price and/or scope of the contract when they occur – they do not
affect the transaction price of the contract, or create implied promised goods or
services, at contract inception. Unexpected concessions generally arise from
situations where a pattern of granting concessions did not exist at the time of
entering into the contract and there was no reasonable expectation of
granting one.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              184
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Example C90.1
                  Pattern of granting concessions
ABC Corp. licenses ERP software to its customers. ABC is a second-tier player
in the ERP software market; it therefore has a significant incentive to try to
ensure it keeps its existing customers from moving to one of the larger
software providers, and to try to develop a competitive advantage against the
larger ERP software providers.
ABC’s contracts do not generally include rights to new software modules that are
developed; they hope to be able to charge their customers for those. However,
ABC has developed a practice of providing any new modules to its largest
customers or those nearing the end of their current term licenses or their current
PCS term free of charge. It does this to incentivize those customers to renew
their term license and/or their PCS services.
Because customers in the marketplace communicate (e.g. personnel move
from one customer to another), ABC’s customary business practice is known by
both renewing and prospective customers.
ABC concludes that its history of providing free licenses to additional software
products to its customer base creates an implied promise in its software license
contracts to transfer rights to use unspecified additional software products,
when-and-if developed. The duration of that promise depends on ABC’s
customary business practice – i.e. ABC will need to determine for what period
time it typically provides such free items, which may differ for different classes
of customer (e.g. ABC’s largest customers versus smaller customers, and term
license customers versus perpetual license customers).
Question C320 and Examples C320.1 and C320.2 discuss whether
unspecified additional software product rights are distinct from a transferred
software license.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Accounting effect of a history of granting concessions
Legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance described changes to
an arrangement that constitute concessions, including:
— changes that would have affected the original amount of revenue
  recognized;
— changes that reduce the arrangement fee or extend payment terms; and
— changes that increase deliverables or extend the customer’s rights without
  a commensurate increase in fees.
Examples of each type of concession were provided in the legacy guidance.
The examples of concessions that increased deliverables or extended the
customer’s rights are consistent with the examples provided in this publication,
including Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              185
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Under legacy US GAAP, concessions could result in all contract revenues being
deferred. A pattern of granting concessions called into question the fixed or
determinable nature of the fees under the arrangement, meaning none were
eligible for recognition until the risk of concession had been abated. Often this
was significantly later than when revenue would have been recognized absent
the entity’s pattern of granting concessions; and could be after all of the stated
elements in the contract were delivered and all of the arrangement fees
collected.
The accounting effect of a pattern of concessions under Topic 606 is
considerably different from the effect under legacy US GAAP.
— An entity’s historical pattern of granting concessions that reduce the
  transaction price or extend payment terms affects the measurement of the
  transaction price under Topic 606 (creating variable consideration), rather
  than delaying revenue recognition altogether. This may result in a portion
  (but typically not all) of the contract consideration being recognized when
  the promised goods or services are transferred to the customer – with
  some portion being deferred until the uncertainty associated with the
  potential concession is resolved.
— An entity’s historical pattern of giving customers free or significantly
  discounted goods or services may create additional, implied promised
  goods or services (including material rights) that an entity would need to
  account for in the contract. This will typically not result in deferral of all
  contract revenues but rather a portion of the transaction price will be
  deferred until either those implied goods or services are transferred to the
  customer or the risk of concession has abated.
Accounting for unexpected concessions
Under legacy US GAAP, the accounting for a concession that was not
reasonably foreseeable when the arrangement was entered into occurred when
the concession was granted and depended on the nature of the concession.
If the substance of the concession was the right to return one product for a
new product, cash or other benefit, the concession was accounted for as a
return right under legacy Subtopic 605-15.
However, if the form or substance of the concession was a modification of the
original arrangement to provide additional deliverables, then either of the
following accounting policies were acceptable alternatives that could be elected
and applied consistently by the entity:
— Prospective approach: The concession was accounted for as a new
  arrangement or a contract renegotiation or modification. Any remaining
  deferred revenue from the original arrangement plus any further
  consideration to be received under the modified arrangement were
  reallocated to the deliverables under the modified arrangement. If the
  remaining revenue allocated to an undelivered element did not equal or
  exceed estimated remaining costs for the undelivered element – i.e.
  because some or all arrangement consideration has been recognized as
  revenue before the modification – a loss was recognized at the date of the
  concession. For purposes of applying the prospective approach, it was
  necessary to analyze the facts and circumstances to determine the original
  arrangement(s) to which the concession related for purposes of identifying



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              186
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




      the existing deferred revenue that would be considered for reallocation to
      the elements of the modified agreement.
— Balance sheet approach: Alternatively, the concession was accounted for
  similar to a return. The entity increased deferred revenue to the full amount
  that would have been recorded at that date had the concession been part of
  the original contract, with a corresponding reduction in revenue for the
  period in which the concession was granted.
Under Topic 606, an unexpected change in the scope of the contract (i.e. by adding
additional goods or services) is accounted for as a contract modification. The
accounting for a contract modification that increases the scope of the contract
through a concession – i.e. by granting free or significantly discounted additional
goods or services – largely depends on whether the additional goods or services
and the remaining goods or services that were part of the existing contract are
distinct from the goods or services transferred before the modification.
If they are distinct, the modified contract is accounted for prospectively – i.e.
there is no cumulative effect adjustment resulting from the modification. If the
additional goods or services and the remaining goods or services that were part
of the existing contract are not distinct from the goods or services transferred
before the modification, there will typically be a cumulative effect adjustment
resulting from the modification.
Chapter G – Contract modifications, addresses the accounting for contract
modifications in further detail.



                  Question C100
                  Are promises to provide services to a reseller’s end
                  customers performance obligations of the software
                  entity in its contract with the reseller?
Interpretive response: It depends. To illustrate, assume a software entity
transfers control of software licenses to its reseller or distributor customer. The
entity then promises other goods or services as sales incentives to end
customers to encourage the sale of those products that have become part of
the intermediary’s inventory. The sales incentives might comprise free technical
support or unspecified updates/upgrades/enhancements.
If the promise to transfer goods or services that are sales incentives is made at
the time of transfer of control of the related good or service to the intermediary
(i.e. the distributor or reseller), it should be identified as a promised good or
service of the contract between the entity and the intermediary. This would
occur when the promise to transfer those goods or services was made in the
contract, or implied by an entity’s customary business practices, published
policies or specific statements such that it created a reasonable expectation of
the ultimate customer that the entity will transfer a good or service.
However, if the promise was made after the transfer of control of the license to
the intermediary (and no implied promise was made – see preceding
paragraph), the promise would not be a promised good or service in the original
sale between the entity and its customer (i.e. the distributor or reseller), when




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              187
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




the distributor or reseller is not solely an agent of the entity in its transaction
with the end customer. In this case, all the revenue is recognized when the
goods are transferred to the reseller or distributor and the entity accrues the
cost of the incentive when the promise is made. However, once the entity
makes an initial offer it needs to consider whether it establishes a pattern that
creates an expectation by the intermediary or end customer. As a consequence,
this scenario may be limited.



                  Example C100.1
                  Technical support and unspecified upgrade rights
                  provided to a reseller’s end-user customers
Description of the contract
ABC Corp. licenses its software to satellite radio providers. ABC has entered
into a licensing arrangement with Customer that, for a fixed upfront fee,
permits Customer to sell ABC’s software together with Customer’s satellite
radio hardware systems.
ABC has a customary business practice of providing telephone support, as well
as unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements (collectively, PCS) to
Customer’s customers (end user) free of charge. End users and Customer
reasonably expect ABC to continue this practice.
Evaluation
ABC evaluates whether the technical support and the right to receive
unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements are additional promised
services (collectively, PCS) in its contract with Customer. ABC notes the
promise to provide PCS free of charge to end users is a sales incentive that is
an additional promised service in the contract. Based on ABC’s customary
business practice, Customer and end users reasonably expect (at the time of
transfer of control of the software license to Customer) to receive the PCS.
As a result, the PCS is an additional promised service in its contract with
Customer. If that PCS is a separate performance obligation (see Questions
C150-C170), ABC will defer a portion of the proceeds from the sale of the
software license to the reseller. That portion will be recognized as revenue as
ABC satisfies the PCS performance obligation (see Question F235).


Software licenses

                  Question C110
                  Are software licenses capable of being distinct in
                  accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19(a)?

Interpretive response: Generally, yes. Being capable of being distinct means
that a customer can benefit from the software license on its own or together
with other readily available resources. Therefore, even if the economic benefits




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              188
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




that can be derived from the software license on its own or together with
readily available resources might be minor compared to the economic benefits
the customer can obtain from the software license together with the other
goods or services promised in the contract, the software license will generally
be considered capable of being distinct.
This conclusion is supported by the fact that each example of a software
license in Topic 606, including those for which the conclusion is that the
software license is not separately identifiable from a promised service in the
contract, concludes the software license is capable of being distinct. [606-10-25-
19(a); Example 10 Case C – paragraphs 606-10-55-140D – 55-140F; Example 11 Case A –
paragraphs 606-10-55-141 – 55-145; Example 11 Case B – paragraphs 606-10-55-146 – 55-150]

However, a software license may not always be capable of being distinct and
how this determination is reached may vary depending on the nature of the
software being licensed. A software entity’s conclusion and/or basis for
evaluation in this regard may differ depending on whether the software is off-
the-shelf software or core software.
Off-the-shelf software is often defined as software marketed as a stock item
that customers can use with little or no customization. Off-the-shelf software
can be added to a contract with insignificant changes in the underlying code and
it could be used by the customer for the customer’s purposes upon installation.
Customers generally can benefit from off-the-shelf software on its own or
together with implementation or other services that are readily available from
the software vendor or other third-party professional service providers. If
significant services, such as to significantly modify or customize the software
code, were necessary for the software to provide even a baseline economic
benefit to the customer, this would call into question whether the software was
really off-the-shelf software, as opposed to core software.
Core software is generally defined as an inventory of software that vendors
use in creating other software. Core software is not delivered ‘as is’ because
customers cannot use it unless it is customized to meet system objectives or
customer specifications. A software product that is never licensed without
significant additional coding services is a strong indicator that the product may
be core software.
Core software does not, in most circumstances, provide the customer with
benefit on its own; it can only provide benefit to the customer if readily available
resources, such as available services, exist that would allow the customer to
benefit from use of the software. Readily available resources could consist of
(1) the entity’s own customization services if it sells such services separately
(i.e. in contracts separate from the licensing of its software) or (2) the
customization services of a third party.
Given that, in many cases, significant customization or modification of an
entity’s software cannot be performed by a third party (the second scenario),
there are likely to be many instances where there is no third party that can
customize the entity’s core software to enable it to function. In such
circumstances, unless the entity sells such services separately (the first
scenario), core software may not provide benefit to the customer independent
of other goods and services with which it is bundled. Therefore, it will not be
capable of being distinct.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              189
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question C120
                  If an arrangement includes multiple software
                  licenses (e.g. licenses to multiple software
                  applications or modules), which may or may not be
                  transferred to the customer at different points in
                  time, how should an entity evaluate if those
                  licenses are separate performance obligations?
Interpretive response: Two or more software licenses will typically be distinct
if the licenses are merely ‘additive’ to each other. They will typically not be
distinct when the different licenses have a ‘transformative’ or significantly
‘magnifying’ effect on each other.
Put another way, if an entity licenses software products A and B to a customer,
the distinct analysis would generally hinge on whether:
— the combination of A + B equals AB (i.e. the combined functionality of the
  two applications is merely the sum of the two licenses’ individual
  functionalities). In that case, the two licenses would generally be distinct
  from each other; or
— the combination of A + B equals X (i.e. the combination of the two
  elements results in incremental or changed functionalities that don’t exist in
  either software application separately) or ABx (i.e. the combination of the
  licenses produces a significantly enhanced level of functionality that is
  greater than the aggregate of the two elements’ individual functionalities).
  Either of these scenarios would generally suggest that the two licenses are
  not distinct from each other.
This notion also affects the distinct analysis for other software-related
elements, such as in determining whether software and SaaS elements are
distinct from each other (see Question C310) and whether a software license
and certain implementation/configuration services are distinct from each other
(see Question C260).
We believe that the analysis above is consistent with the underlying principle
for the distinct evaluation described by the FASB in the Basis for Conclusions to
ASU 2016-10.




                  Excerpt from ASU 2016-10

BC29. The Board intends to convey that an entity should evaluate whether the
contract is to deliver (a) multiple goods or services or (b) a combined item or
items that is comprised of the individual goods or services promised in the
contract. That is, entities should evaluate whether the multiple promised goods
or services in the contract are outputs or, instead, are inputs to a combined
item (or items). The inputs to a combined item (or items) concept might be
further explained, in many cases, as those in which an entity’s promise to
transfer the promised goods or services results in a combined item (or items)




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              190
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




that is greater than (or substantively different from) the sum of those promised
(component) goods and services.
BC32. …The separately identifiable principle is intended to consider the level of
integration, interrelation, or interdependence among promises to transfer
goods or services. That is, the separately identifiable principle is intended to
evaluate when an entity’s performance in transferring a bundle of goods or
services in a contract is, in substance, fulfilling a single promise to a customer.
Therefore, the entity should evaluate whether two or more promised goods or
services (for example, a delivered item and an undelivered item) each
significantly affect the other (and, therefore, are highly interdependent or highly
interrelated) in the contract. The entity should not merely evaluate whether one
item, by its nature, depends on the other (for example, an undelivered item
that would never be obtained by a customer absent the presence of the
delivered item in the contract or the customer having obtained that item in a
different contract)…


Professional services are discussed starting at Question C220. However, we
believe that professional services provided to effect a software system (or
solution) by implementing/integrating multiple software applications that are not
distinct from each other (e.g. as described in the preceding paragraphs) would
typically provide a ‘significant integration service’. An example is the installation
and interfacing of multiple, non-distinct software applications that comprise the
system/solution. The professional services would be an additional input,
together with the multiple, non-distinct software licenses, to the combined
system/solution output for which the customer contracted, and therefore such
professional services would not be distinct from the software licenses.


Post-contract customer support (PCS)

                  Question C130
                  Is the nature of an entity’s promise to provide
                  technical support or unspecified (when-and-if
                  available) updates, upgrades and enhancements a
                  stand-ready obligation?
Technical support
Interpretive response: Technical support will typically be a stand-ready
obligation. This is because software entities that provide technical support
usually maintain an infrastructure – e.g. dedicated customer support personnel,
a call center and/or a website for online support assistance – that ‘stands ready’
to provide support to customers when-and-as needed. In addition, customers
generally have the right and ability to obtain such support when-and-as needed
throughout the support period and are not limited to a defined number of
support calls or requests (subject to possible restrictions on times of day or
days of the week that support is available).
However, if the technical support obligation is to provide a specified number of
support events (or up to a specified number of support events that is



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              191
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




substantive – i.e. it is not in excess of any realistic expectation of the
customer’s use of those services), then the technical support obligation is not a
stand-ready obligation.
Promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements
Interpretive response: A promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades
and enhancements will also be a stand-ready obligation when the nature of the
entity’s promise is to transfer an undefined number of updates, upgrades or
enhancements (i.e. any and all) that are developed during the support period. In
that case, the customer benefits throughout the support period from the
assurance that any updates or upgrades developed by the entity during the
period will be made available.
In contrast, if an entity’s promise to the customer or its customary business
practice is to provide a defined number of updates, upgrades or enhancements
(e.g. a single release each year with all of the accumulated updates, upgrades
and enhancements developed since the previous year’s release) that would
typically suggest the nature of the entity’s promise is to transfer that defined
number of releases. It is not a stand-ready obligation to transfer any and all
updates, upgrades and enhancements (of an undefined type and quantity)
during the support period.
If the nature of the entity’s promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades
and enhancements is that of standing ready to transfer to the customer such
items when-and-if they become available, the customer is generally benefitting
evenly throughout the obligation period from the assurance that any such items
developed by the entity during the period will be made available to it. Therefore,
a time-based measure of progress will typically be appropriate.
However, a measure of progress other than time-based may be appropriate in
some circumstances even when the entity’s promise to provide unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancements is a stand-ready obligation. At the
January 2015 meeting of the TRG, members generally agreed with members of
the FASB staff that a straight-line, time-based measure of progress should not
always be applied to a stand-ready obligation.
For example:
— If it is expected (based on an explicit promise to the customer or the
  entity’s customary business practice) that releases will always or
  predominantly occur at a specific time (or in a specified period – e.g. the
  fourth quarter) each year, an input-based measure, reflective of the uneven
  efforts that the entity will undertake to transfer the releases to the
  customer each year of the obligation period, may be appropriate.
— It may be expected at contract inception that there will be a significant
  upgrade or enhancement (that is not a specified upgrade or enhancement)
  transferred to the customer at a specific point in time during the support
  period (e.g. the entity expects to release principally bug fixes and other
  minor updates throughout the support period, but also expects to release a
  significant enhancement or version upgrade 12 months after contract
  inception that will substantially enhance the licensed software). In that
  case, the benefit the customer will receive from the unspecified updates,
  upgrades, and enhancements provision may not be even throughout the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              192
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




      obligation period. Therefore, a different measure of progress (i.e. other than
      one that is time-based) may be appropriate.



                  Question C140
                  If an obligation to provide technical support
                  services or one to provide unspecified update/
                  upgrade/enhancement rights is a stand-ready
                  obligation, is the obligation a ‘series’ of distinct
                  service periods?
Interpretive response: In general, if the obligation, either to provide technical
support or to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements, is a
stand-ready obligation (see Question C130), it will qualify as a series. For
example, a two-year technical support or unspecified
updates/upgrades/enhancements obligation would be a series of distinct
monthly, weekly or daily support periods.
For a service obligation to be a series, there generally must be multiple time
periods within the overall obligation period that:
a. are distinct from each other;
b. are substantially the same;
c. are satisfied over time (based on the over-time recognition criteria in
   paragraph 606-10-25-27); and
d. have the same pattern of transfer to the customer – e.g. the entity would
   measure progress toward complete satisfaction of each distinct service
   period obligation using the same measure of progress.
Taking each of the above criteria in turn for a multi-year technical support or
unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights obligation:
a.    Distinct. Each service period (e.g. each month, or even each day) within
      the larger obligation period that the entity stands ready provides benefit to
      the customer on its own – i.e. each service period is capable of being
      distinct. In addition, the entity’s promises to provide support services or
      transfer any updates, upgrades or enhancements released in one service
      period is separately identifiable from those service periods preceding and
      following it – i.e. no one period of service is essential to, dependent on or
      significantly modifies or customizes another period of service.
b. Substantially the same. Even though the mix and quantity of activities
   that the entity will perform each distinct period (e.g. number of support
   inquiries fielded or number and type of updates, upgrades and/or
   enhancements released) may differ, the nature of the entity’s promise each
   period is substantially the same. This conclusion and underlying rationale is
   consistent with examples of transaction processors and electricity suppliers
   discussed by the TRG at its July 2015 meeting, as well as one for a hotel
   manager in Topic 606 (Example 12A). In each of those examples, the
   quantity and mix of activities differs from one distinct service period to
   another but, because the nature of the entity’s promise was the same




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              193
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




      integrated or stand-ready service each period, each service period was
      deemed to be ‘substantially the same’.
c.    Satisfied over time. Because the nature of the entity’s promise is a stand-
      ready obligation, rather than to provide specified goods or perform specified
      activities, the customer consumes and receives benefit from the technical
      support services and the unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights
      throughout the overall obligation period. Therefore, the entity’s promise to
      perform each service period is satisfied over time.
d. Same pattern of transfer. Regardless of the measure of progress selected
   for the stand-ready obligation (see Question C130), we would expect the
   same measure of progress to be applied to each distinct service period.



                  Question C150
                  Are the component services of PCS separate
                  performance obligations?


  Post-contract customer support (PCS)
  PCS includes the right to receive services (typically telephone support and
  maintenance) or unspecified upgrades and enhancements, or both, offered to
  users or resellers, after the software license period begins, or after another
  point in time as provided for by the PCS agreement. PCS does not include (i)
  installation or other services directly related to the initial license of the
  software, (ii) specified upgrade rights even if a customer would otherwise be
  entitled to the upgrade right as a subscriber to PCS, or (iii) rights to additional
  specified or unspecified software products.


Interpretive response: PCS often involves, at a minimum, some form of
technical support and a promise to provide the customer with updates/upgrades
or other enhancements on a when-and-if available basis. This is illustrated in the
implementation guidance to Topic 606 (Example 11).
Technical support services and a promise to provide unspecified updates,
upgrades and enhancements will generally be distinct from each other because:
— each service is capable of being distinct. Customers receive benefit from
  each service together with the associated software license to which the
  service relates; and the software license is transferred before either
  providing technical support or unspecified updates, upgrades or
  enhancements; and
— the two promises to provide those services are separately identifiable:
      —      the two services are not inputs to a combined output for which the
             software vendor provides any significant integration service;
      —      the provision (or not) of each service does not significantly modify or
             customize the other; and




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              194
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract



      —      a software entity could typically provide either service irrespective of
             whether it provided the other, which means the two services are not
             highly interrelated or interdependent.
Even though technical support services and unspecified update, upgrade and
enhancement rights will typically be distinct, we expect that many software
entities will account for PCS as a single performance obligation. This is because
they will conclude that the technical support and the right to unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancements are both stand-ready obligations being
provided over the same period of time and have the same pattern of transfer to
the customer (e.g. the entity would apply a time-based measure of progress to
each) – see Question C130. Topic 606 permits entities to account for two
distinct goods or services as a single performance obligation if they are
concurrently delivered (i.e. in this case, if the technical support services and the
unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights are co-terminus) and have the
same pattern of transfer to the customer. [ASU 2014-09.BC116]




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy Subtopic 985-605 defined PCS as a single software-related element.
Consequently, entities did not consider separating the components of PCS,
even when the customer paid for ‘platinum’ PCS – e.g. 24/7 technical support
and rights to receive certain significant upgrades or enhancements that were
not included as part of the entity’s ‘standard’ PCS.
In addition, because the component services of PCS are rarely, if ever, sold
separately from each other by software entities, they generally would not have
been separable under legacy US GAAP. This is because entities would have
been unable to establish vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (VSOE)
for those components.
The requirement under Topic 606 to separate the technical support component
of PCS from the right to unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements in
some cases (as outlined in this question) will be a significant change for those
entities that need to do so.



                  Question C160
                  Are technical support services distinct from the
                  software license to which they relate?

Interpretive response: In general, yes. Technical support services and the
software license to which those technical support services relate will be distinct
from each other.
While the software license will generally be capable of being distinct for the
reasons outlined in Question C110, the technical support services will be
capable of being distinct in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19(a). This is
because the customer will benefit from those services together with the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              195
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




software license transferred to the customer before providing the technical
support services.
The entity’s promises to transfer the software license and to provide technical
support services will typically be separately identifiable in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-19(b) – i.e. not inputs to a combined item. This is because:
— neither the license, nor the support services, customize or modify the other
  – e.g. technical support services do not change or enhance the functionality
  of the software; and
— the software entity is able to transfer the license and provide the support
  services independently of each other. For example, the entity is able to
  transfer the software license without ever providing support services to the
  customer, and is also able to provide support services to a customer that
  acquired its license to the software product from a third party, such as
  a reseller.
Consequently, it will generally be clear that there is neither a significant
integration service being performed by the software entity to create a combined
item comprised of the licensed software and the support services, nor any
significant level of interrelationship or interdependence between the license and
the support services.



                  Question C170
                  How does a software vendor evaluate whether a
                  software license is distinct from a promise to
                  provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
                  enhancements?
Interpretive response: If a software license is capable of being distinct (see
Question C110), a promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements to that software license will also be capable of being distinct.
This is because the customer will benefit from that promise together with the
software license transferred to customer before it could ever receive updates,
upgrades or enhancements to the software.
In most contracts, the promise to transfer the software license and a promise to
provide unspecified updates, upgrades or enhancements related to that software
product will be separately identifiable from each other. This is based on the
following reasons (in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19(b)).
— Similar to the discussion in Question C160 related to technical support
  services, the software entity is able to transfer the license and provide
  future updates, upgrades and enhancements independent of each other.
  The entity can, and in general must, transfer the initial software license
  before it can provide updates, upgrades or enhancements to the software.
  In addition, as with technical support services, the entity is able to transfer
  a license to the software without promising to provide future unspecified
  updates, upgrades or enhancements and is able to provide such items to a
  customer that acquired its license to the software product from a third
  party, such as reseller. Consequently, the license and unspecified




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              196
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




      update/upgrade/enhancement rights are not highly interrelated or
      interdependent.
— The promise to later (i.e. subsequent to transfer of the initial software
  license) transfer any updates, upgrades or enhancements produced means
  that the entity is not providing a significant integration service to transfer a
  single, combined output that uses the initial license and later updates,
  upgrades or enhancements as inputs.
— The updates, upgrades and enhancements will modify the software to
  which the customer has rights. However, in general, many updates or
  upgrades that will be received during the course of a support period will not
  significantly modify the software – i.e. the update, upgrade or enhancement
  may be minor. And frequently an update, upgrade or enhancement provided
  to the customer will not modify the customer’s instance of the software
  because the customer is not required to, and will not, install it.
However, in more limited circumstances, Topic 606 illustrates that a software
license may not be distinct from a promise to provide unspecified updates,
upgrades or enhancements. This is because there is, effectively, a reasonable
certainty that updates will be provided that are integral to the customer’s ability
to continue to derive substantive benefit from the software license (i.e. its utility
to the customer) throughout the license period. [Ex 10 Case C – paragraphs 606-10-55-
140D – 55-140F, ASU 2016-10.BC33(b)]

Example 10 Case C in Topic 606 further illustrates, as part of the basis for the
conclusion reached, that the updates are expected to significantly modify the
functionality of the software by enabling the software to protect the customer
from a significant number of additional viruses. The typical anti-virus scenario
differs from the discussion in the third bullet above in that customers almost
universally install anti-virus updates and upgrades received; this is because the
fundamental purpose of the arrangement is to provide ongoing protection to the
customer from existing and especially emerging threats, which requires
frequent and substantive updates to deal with emerging threats.
We expect the conclusion that a software license and a promise to provide
unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements are not distinct from each
other to, in general, be supported by evidence that:
— the utility of the software will degrade significantly during the license period
  (and not predominantly at or near the end of that period only) if updates,
  upgrades or enhancements are not provided;
— the updates are, in fact, integral to the customer continuing to obtain
  substantive utility from the software license; and
— the provision of substantive updates is inherent to the customer value
  proposition – i.e. a customer would view these updates as essential and
  generally expect these updates as a minimum requirement to obtain its
  business.
The first two of these might be evidenced, for example, by information
supporting that the vast majority of customers regularly and timely download
updates, upgrades or enhancements released. If customers do not do so, that
would call into question whether expected updates are truly integral to
maintaining the utility of the software, and therefore whether the license and
the updates are inputs to a combined item or solution.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              197
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Meanwhile, the essential nature of the unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements right might be evidenced, for example, by the entity’s
promotional and marketing materials and/or by the nature and extent of the
entity’s efforts to satisfy that promise – e.g. a standing team and/or process to
timely identify and make necessary updates or upgrades.



                  Example C170.1
                  Software license and PCS
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide a three-year license
to Customer for its off-the-shelf software and also to provide both technical
support services and any updates, upgrades and enhancements developed
during the three-year term.
ABC never sells its software licenses, its technical support services, or its
unspecified update, upgrade or enhancement rights separately. The software
functions to its specifications without the support services or the updates,
upgrades or enhancements.
In addition, the following facts are relevant:
— The utility of the software (i.e. its ability to provide benefit or value to the
  customer) is not expected to degrade significantly over the three-year term
  if no updates, upgrades or enhancements are delivered to the customer (or
  the customer chose not to install them).
— ABC maintains a substantive infrastructure to provide support to customers
  when-and-as needed.
— ABC has historically provided releases ranging from minor bug fixes, minor
  and major version upgrades (i.e. ‘right of the dot’ and ‘left of the dot’
  upgrades), and functionality enhancements to its customers, but the type,
  timing and quantity of such releases has not been consistent or predictable
  in the past. This means that the type, timing and quantity of updates,
  upgrades and enhancements that will be provided is unpredictable at
  contract inception.
ABC first identifies that there are three promised goods and services in the
contract: the software license, technical support services, and the promise to
provide unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements.
Next, ABC concludes that it will account for the technical support services and
the promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements as a
single performance obligation; this is because they will be provided over the
same period (three years) and have the same pattern of transfer to the
customer. ABC concludes that both the technical support services and the
unspecified upgrade rights are stand-ready obligations based on:
— the technical support infrastructure that ABC maintains; and
— the indeterminate type, quantity and timing of support services and
  updates, upgrades or enhancements that ABC will provide over the three-
  year term.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              198
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




These factors also support that a time-based attribution method for both of
those promised services would be reasonable.
Lastly, ABC concludes that the software license and the PCS (the combined
technical support and unspecified update, upgrade and enhancement rights) are
distinct from each other based on the following:
— The software license and the PCS are capable of being distinct.
  Because the software functions to its specifications without the PCS,
  Customer can benefit from the software license on its own without the
  PCS and can benefit from the PCS together with the software license
  transferred before the performance of the PCS.
— The entity’s promise to transfer the software license and to provide
  PCS are separately identifiable. ABC would be able to transfer the
  software license and the two components of the PCS independently. This
  supports that the license and the PCS are not highly interrelated or
  interdependent, and that the entity is not providing a significant integration
  service in the contract to produce a combined output (using the license and
  the PCS as inputs). Further, neither the technical support nor the
  unspecified updates, upgrades or enhancements is expected to significantly
  modify or customize the licensed software. Finally, the utility of the
  software to Customer will not significantly degrade during the license
  period if updates, upgrades or enhancements are not provided; therefore,
  this example is not analogous to the anti-virus example in Topic 606.
Consequently, ABC concludes that there are two performance obligations in
this contract: the software license and PCS.
Under legacy US GAAP, because ABC never sells the undelivered PCS on a
stand-alone basis, it would not have been able to establish VSOE for the PCS
services; therefore, ABC would not have separated the license element from
the PCS services.
Example C320.2 demonstrates a scenario where a promise to provide
unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements (as well as a promise to
provide the right to use unspecified future software products) is not distinct
from an initial software license.



                  Example C170.2
                  Software license and updates (1)
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide a three-year term
license to Customer for its trade compliance (TC) software and to provide
updates to critical trade data (i.e. content) that the software uses to assist
Customer in complying with trade regulations.
The trade data includes restricted party lists, import/export regulations
(including duties, taxes and fees), freight rates, Free Trade Agreement rules and
transportation schedules/tariffs. The content updates deliver the latest version
of the contracted-for trade data (similar to the manner in which anti-virus
software provides updated virus definition files).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              199
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Content updates are provided on a when-and-if available basis throughout the
three-year term, and the right to content updates is co-terminus with the
license term. TC licenses are never sold without the content updates.
ABC considers the following additional facts.
1. There are typically multiple content updates provided to a customer each
   day during the license term.
2. Content updates are automatically ‘pushed’ to customers and universally
   implemented by customers as soon as they are made available.
3. Customers rely on the content updates to comply with US trade law, and
   the laws and regulations in many other countries. Failure to receive timely
   information about changes to relevant trade data could result in the
   customer failing to comply with trade laws and regulations, with potentially
   significant ramifications. For example, failure to comply with trade laws and
   regulations could subject the customer to penalties or fines, possible ‘cease
   and desist’ orders from Customs authorities and other legal issues. There
   also could be shipment/delivery delays or reputational damage resulting
   from trade compliance issues that result in lost or reduced business.
Although ABC concludes that the software license and the content updates are
capable of being distinct, they are not distinct from each other (i.e. they are not
distinct in the context of the contract) and, therefore, are a single performance
obligation to Customer. This is because, based on the key facts (Nos. 1 - 3)
outlined above, ABC determines that the utility of the software to Customer
(i.e. the benefit Customer will obtain from its right to use the software) will
significantly degrade during the license period if ABC does not provide content
updates. The content updates are integral to the customer obtaining its
intended benefit from the TC software license. This is because Customer’s use
of the TC software is intended to protect Customer from costly trade
noncompliance issues, and without frequent and timely updates, the TC
software will not perform that function adequately for more than a minor
portion of the three-year license term.
Consequently, ABC concludes that its promises to grant the TC license and to
provide unspecified content updates are not separately identifiable; the TC
license and the content updates are, in effect, inputs to the combined item (a
trade compliance solution) that Customer entered into the contract with ABC to
obtain.



                  Example C170.3
                  Software license and updates (2)
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide a one-year term
license and co-terminus PCS to Customer for its project management software
(Product PM). ABC’s project management software is designed to complement
and interoperate with software of an unrelated third party (XYZ Corp.). It does
not have meaningful independent functionality (i.e. separate from
interacting/interoperating with XYZ’s software). PCS includes technical support
and unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements. ABC’s contract




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              200
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




expressly refers to Product PM updates for continued interoperability and
compatibility with XYZ’s software as an element of the PCS.
ABC evaluates whether its promises to transfer the Product PM term license
and provide unspecified updates to the Product PM software for continued XYZ
product interoperability and compatibility are separately identifiable from each
other. ABC considers the following key facts.
1. ABC prominently markets Product PM’s interoperability and compatibility
   with XYZ’s complementary software. ABC’s experience with Product PM
   customers – e.g. in negotiations, RFPs, post-implementation support, etc. –
   suggests this interoperability and compatibility are integral features to
   customers’ decisions to license Product PM.
2. ABC’s history with Product PM and XYZ’s software shows that many XYZ
   software updates create significant interoperability/compatibility issues with
   Product PM if Product PM is not also updated, and ABC must test all XYZ
   software updates to know whether a significant interoperability/
   compatibility issue will result. Product PM would generally not be useful to
   customers for the duration of any such issue. Therefore, ABC maintains a
   regular connection to XYZ’s development team (i.e. regular meetings and
   participation in all XYZ software beta or other early release version testing)
   so that it can timely test, and where necessary, enact critical
   interoperability/compatibility updates concurrent with XYZ software
   releases to customers.
3. Observable information demonstrates that Product PM users generally use
   the product regularly; that is, it is a regularly used application by licensees
   such that significant interoperability or compatibility issues would create
   almost immediate and substantive ongoing issues for them.
4. Year to year, the number of XYZ software updates that create significant
   interoperability or compatibility issues varies, but there have been multiple
   such XYZ software updates each year since Product PM’s inception.
5. XYZ’s software is regularly updated; in general, at least 8 - 10 times per
   year. However, ABC knows from customer interactions and its relationship
   with XYZ (see key fact #2) that XYZ customers generally do not implement
   all XYZ software version upgrades (e.g. an XYZ customer likely does not
   update with each version upgrade), but it is only a minor portion that do not
   upgrade their XYZ software at all during a one-year Product PM license
   term.
6. ABC can observe that 81% of Product PM licensees have upgraded at least
   once during the last 12 months from the Customer contract date, and that
   number remains relatively constant at 80 - 84% over the last three years on
   a rolling 12-month basis. In that regard, ABC considers that:
      a.     as per key fact #5, some customers do not upgrade their XYZ software
             each year (meaning a Product PM update is not necessary for that
             customer and, in fact, could create an interoperability/compatibility
             issue); and
      b. not all XYZ software updates necessitate a Product PM update (so it is
         possible a customer only implemented an XYZ software version during
         the period that did not necessitate a Product PM update).



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              201
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Based on the totality of the above facts, ABC concludes that its promises to
transfer a Product PM term license and to provide co-terminus unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancements to Product PM are not separately
identifiable; they are both integral to Customer receiving its intended benefit
from the arrangement, which is continuous access throughout the license term
to Product PM’s complementary and interoperative functionality with XYZ’s
software. A failure of Product PM to be able to interoperate with XYZ’s
software effectively renders the Product PM license useless to the customer
until such interoperability and compatibility are restored.



                   Question C175
                   If a software license and update rights are not
                   distinct from each other, what is the effect of a
                   renewal option for the update rights if the license
                   and those initial rights are not co-terminus?
Interpretive response: Question C170 addresses when a software license and
a right to unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements (‘update rights’) are
not distinct from each other, and therefore, are a single performance obligation.
It may be the case that this occurs when the software license is perpetual or for
a term longer than the initial bundled update rights, and the contract grants the
customer the option to renew the update rights. In those cases, unless the
renewal option is priced commensurate with the price for the initial bundled
offering, the renewal option generally provides the customer with a material
right. Inherent in the conclusion that the license and the update rights are not
distinct from each other is the premise that those update rights are integral to
maintaining the utility of the software license and fulfilling the promise to the
customer (e.g. of computer virus protection). Consequently, a renewal price for
the update rights that is not substantially commensurate with the initial bundled
offering price, reflective of the significant value one would ascribe to the
integral update rights, would generally not be considered to reflect the stand-
alone selling price for the renewed update rights.
A software entity that concludes that the renewal option(s) is (are) a material
right(s) would allocate the transaction price of the contract for the initial bundled
license/update rights to the performance obligations that were identified, i.e. (1)
the combined performance obligation comprised of the license and initial
update rights and (2) the material right(s). This would generally result in the
software entity recognizing a significant portion of the transaction price of the
initial contract (i.e. the portion allocated to the material right(s)) over future
renewal periods of the update rights.
In contrast, if the renewal fee is substantially consistent with the initial, bundled
price of the license and the update rights, it may be that no material right exists
and, consistent with Question G40, exercising the renewal option would be
accounted for as a separate contract from the initial contract for the bundled
license/update rights.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              202
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question C180
                  Are the considerations with respect to determining
                  the performance obligations for promises of
                  technical support and unspecified updates,
                  upgrades and enhancements different in a SaaS
                  arrangement and a software licensing
                  arrangement?
Interpretive response: Questions C160 and C170, respectively, address
whether technical support services and unspecified
update/upgrade/enhancement rights and the related software license(s) are
distinct from each other.
In general, there is no difference in the answers to these questions in the
context of a SaaS arrangement. However, to some extent the ‘distinct’ analysis
differs depending on whether the customer is accessing a dedicated instance
of the SaaS provider’s software (a ‘single-tenant’ architecture) or a shared
instance of the software (a ‘multi-tenant’ architecture).

  Single-tenant architecture vs multi-tenant architecture
  A multi-tenant architecture is one in which a single instance of a hosted
  software application serves multiple customers. Each customer is called a
  tenant. Tenants may be given the ability to customize some parts of the
  application, such as color of the user interface (UI) or business rules, but they
  cannot customize the application's code.
  In contrast, a single-tenant architecture is one in which only a single
  customer (or tenant) uses an instance of a hosted software application.


Multi-tenant environment
If the customer is accessing a multi-tenant SaaS environment, the customer is
always accessing only the most current version and features of the software.
The SaaS provider’s updates, upgrades or enhancements of the hosted
software do not fulfill a promise to a customer. Therefore, implementing those
items into the multi-tenant instance of the software is not a promised service
to any individual customer in the multi-tenant environment. This conclusion is
further supported by the fact that the SaaS provider is generally continuing
to update its multi-tenant environment for purposes of attracting prospective
customers and encouraging existing customers to extend or renew their
arrangements.
With respect to technical support obligations, we believe the considerations as
to whether the SaaS and the technical support services are distinct would
generally be consistent with the discussion in Question C160. However,
because SaaS is provided over time, like the technical support services, rather
than at a point in time like a software license, an entity may conclude that the
SaaS and the technical support services can be accounted for as a single
performance obligation if they are coterminous and have the same pattern of
transfer to the customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              203
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




It may frequently be concluded that both the SaaS and the technical support
services are stand-ready obligations that have the same pattern of transfer to the
customer – i.e. on a ratable basis. This conclusion is reached for the SaaS on the
basis that the customer typically has equal access to the SaaS throughout the
SaaS period, and for the technical support as described in Question C130.
Single-tenant environment
The considerations in a single-tenant environment will differ from a multi-tenant
environment with respect to unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements.
This is because a promise to provide such items is fulfilled by specifically
uploading them to the customer’s single-tenant instance of the application.
Because it is a single-tenant environment, the entity would be able to not
provide those items to the specific customer, unlike in a multi-tenant
environment. Therefore, the promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades
and enhancements would generally be considered a promised service to the
single-tenant customer.
However, we believe the considerations about whether (1) the SaaS is distinct
from the technical support and unspecified update, upgrade and enhancement
rights; (2) whether the technical support is distinct from the unspecified update,
upgrade and enhancement rights; and (3) whether any (or all) of those items can
be combined because they are concurrently delivered and have the same
pattern of transfer to the customer are consistent with the considerations
outlined in Questions C150 – C170 and in the multi-tenant environment
discussion above.



                  Question C190
                  Can a promise to provide technical support services
                  or to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
                  enhancements be implied?
Interpretive response: Topic 606 states that a promise to provide a good or
service may be implied by an entity’s customary business practices. An implied
obligation to provide technical support or unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements exists in a contract if the entity has a historical pattern of
regularly providing all customers or certain customers with technical support or
unspecified updates, upgrades or enhancements (or anticipates doing so) even
though there is no written contractual obligation.
One common scenario arises when the stipulated term of the explicit technical
support and/or unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement period begins
six months after transfer of control of the software license – e.g. the stipulated
term may not begin until installation of the software is complete or until a
general warranty period has expired. However, the entity has a history of
regularly making available to all customers technical support or unspecified
updates/upgrades/enhancements as soon as the license is transferred. In that
scenario, there would be an implied (by the entity’s customary business
practice) promise to provide those services for the six months before the start
of the explicit service period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              204
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The determination of when an implied PCS obligation exists, and how to
account for that implied obligation, is generally consistent between Topic 606
and legacy US GAAP. However, the different separation models under
Subtopic 985-605 (e.g. the VSOE requirement) and Topic 606 means that the
determination of whether the implied PCS obligation can be separated from
other performance obligations in the contract (e.g. the software license) may
differ between Topic 606 and legacy US GAAP.
With respect to the common scenario outlined above, the determination that an
implied PCS obligation would exist under Topic 606 for the six-month period
subsequent to software delivery, but before the commencement of the explicit
PCS term, is consistent with legacy US GAAP. [985-605-55-53 – 55-55]



                  Question C200
                  If technical support services or unspecified update,
                  upgrade and enhancement rights are mandatory,
                  does that affect the conclusion about whether the
                  software license and those services are distinct?

  Mandatory PCS
  Some software arrangements contain provisions that require the customer to
  renew PCS annually in order to maintain active use of a perpetual or a term
  license – i.e. the customer loses the right to use the software if it does not
  obtain or renew those services. In such arrangements, the customer is not
  only deciding whether to renew PCS each year, it is also deciding whether to
  renew the license.
  The renewal payments after the initial PCS period in a mandatory PCS
  scenario apply to both the continued use of the license and the PCS renewal.
  Additionally, the fee for the initial period may be disproportionate to the fee
  for the renewal periods, even though the deliverables in each period are the
  same – e.g. in each period, the deliverables consist of a one-year software
  license bundled with one year of PCS.
  For example, the fee for the license/PCS bundle in the first year may be
  $1,000,000, and the renewal fee for the license/PCS bundle in each
  subsequent year may be $150,000. In this fact pattern, the $850,000 delta
  between the $1,000,000 upfront fee for the license/PCS bundle and the
  renewal fee for the license/PCS bundle in each subsequent year of
  $150,000 could be deemed an incremental upfront payment that relates to
  the license/PCS bundle in the subsequent years.


Interpretive response: Example 11 Case D in Topic 606 makes it clear that the
distinct evaluation for promised goods or services is based on an evaluation of
the characteristics of the goods or services themselves, and a contractual



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              205
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




requirement to obtain one or more of the goods or services (or to obtain one or
more of the goods or services from the entity) does not affect that evaluation.
Consequently, the distinct evaluation for a contract that includes mandatory
technical support services or mandatory unspecified update, upgrade and
enhancement rights is no different from the distinct evaluation undertaken for
a contract for which those promised services are not mandatory (see
Questions C160 and C170). [606-10-55-150E – 55-150F]
However, even though the mandatory nature of those services may not change
the distinct analysis, it may affect the identification of the promised goods or
services in the contract, and that analysis may differ depending on whether the
software license is perpetual or term-based.
Term licenses
Consider a five-year term license that includes promised technical support
services and unspecified update, upgrade and enhancement rights (collectively,
PCS). If renewal of the PCS is mandatory throughout the license period (e.g.
after an initial one-year term), that may change the parties’ enforceable rights
and obligations compared to the same arrangement for which renewal of those
services is not mandatory. Depending on the facts and circumstances, the
mandatory provision likely means that the contract includes only an initial
one-year software license and one year of PCS, with options to renew both by
paying the stated mandatory PCS renewal fee.
If the customer pays a significant upfront fee for the term license, such that the
fees the customer will pay for the subsequent years’ one-year license and PCS
renewals are substantively lower than the fees paid for the license and the PCS
in Year 1, payment of that upfront fee will provide the customer with a material
right with respect to renewal of the in-substance one-year term license and
PCS. Example C200.1 illustrates this scenario.
Perpetual licenses
Consider the same scenario described in the preceding paragraphs except that
the five-year license is, instead, a perpetual license. Consistent with the above
scenario, the mandatory PCS provision (1) likely means that the contract
includes only an initial one-year software license and one year of PCS, with an
option to renew both by paying the stated mandatory PCS renewal fee and (2)
payment of a significant upfront fee likely provides the customer with a material
right as to renewal of the one-year term license and PCS.
However, in addition, a portion (potentially significant) of the upfront fee will
also relate to a material right to acquire a perpetual license once the mandatory
PCS provision is satisfied. Example C200.2 illustrates this in a perpetual
software license context.
It is possible in a perpetual license scenario that the mandatory PCS period lasts
for all (or substantially all) of the economic life of the licensed software. For
example, the software subject to a perpetual license has an economic life of
7 years and the customer is required to maintain PCS in order to retain its right
to use the software for 7 years. In such cases, we do not believe any additional
perpetual license right is granted in the contract. Therefore, the accounting
would follow that described for term licenses.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              206
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




License fee paid over time vs upfront
We do not believe the accounting for term or perpetual license mandatory PCS
arrangements is affected by whether a legally enforceable license fee is paid
upfront or over time. That is, the timing of payment for a license fee that is
legally enforceable does not affect this analysis. However, in contrast, if the
remainder of the license fee still owed by the customer subsequent to
canceling PCS and losing the right to use the software is not legally
enforceable, that would change the character of the overall contract.
Example C200.3 illustrates a license fee paid over-time scenario.



                  Example C200.1
                  Software license and mandatory PCS (term license)
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide a five-year license to
Product G and also to provide both technical support services and any updates,
upgrades and enhancements developed (collectively, PCS) for one year. If
Customer does not renew PCS each year of the five-year term it loses the right
to use the software – i.e. there is a mandatory PCS provision in the contract.
ABC has determined that:
— it can account for its PCS as a single performance obligation (see
  Question C150); and
— the PCS, even though mandatory, is distinct from the Product G license.
Customer pays an upfront fee of $1,200,000 for the license and the first year of
the mandatory PCS. The contract states that Customer must pay a fee of
$200,000 each year to renew the mandatory PCS.
ABC concludes that the mandatory PCS provision means that the enforceable
rights and obligations of the parties under the contract are for only a one-year term
license to Product G and one year of PCS. Absent Customer deciding to renew
PCS, Customer only has a right to a one-year license and to one year of PCS.
However, the significant upfront fee ($1.2 million) is substantially larger than the
fee Customer would pay during the potential renewal periods ($200,000 per
year in Years 2-5). Therefore, ABC concludes that the initial contract for Year 1
includes a material right with respect to Customer’s options to renew the one-
year license and PCS in Years 2-5.
ABC concludes that the Years 2-5 options provide Customer with a material
right with respect to renewal of the license/PCS for Years 2-5. ABC reaches this
conclusion based on the fact that allocating the upfront fee to each of Years 1-5
using the practical alternative in paragraph 606-10-55-45, which permits ABC to
allocate the transaction price to the optional goods or services by reference to
the goods or services expected to be provided and the corresponding expected
consideration ($2 million in total [$1.2 million in Year 1 + $200,000 per year for
Years 2-5]), would result in an equal allocation of $400,000 to each of those
years. Note that this analysis assumes that based on relevant experience with
similar customers, no breakage is expected (i.e. Customer is expected to
exercise all four renewal options).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              207
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




ABC will therefore recognize $400,000 each year during Years 1-5 for the
license and the PCS, with the portion allocable to the license each year
recognized at the beginning of the renewal period (see Question F100) and the
portion allocable to the PCS each year recognized over the one-year PCS period.
As a consequence, a material right contract liability of $800,000 would be
established at contract inception.
If Customer were to decide not to renew the contract for any of those optional
years, the remaining amount of the contract liability for the material right (which
would be $800,000 at the end of Year 1; $600,000 at the end of Year 2;
$400,000 at the end of Year 3; and $200,000 at the end of Year 4) would be
recognized as revenue at that point in time.



                  Example C200.2
                  Software license and mandatory PCS (perpetual
                  license)
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide a perpetual license
for Product H and also to provide both technical support services and any
updates, upgrades and enhancements developed (collectively, PCS) for one
year. If Customer does not renew PCS each year it loses the right to use the
software – i.e. there is a mandatory PCS provision in the contract.
ABC has determined that:
— it can account for its PCS as a single performance obligation (see
  Question C150); and
— the PCS, even though mandatory, is distinct from the Product H license.
In addition, the following facts are relevant:
— the stand-alone selling price for a perpetual license to Product H is
  $2,000,000;
— the stand-alone selling price for one year of ABC’s PCS on a perpetual
  license at contract inception is $400,000;
— the stand-alone selling price for a one-year license to Product H and co-
  terminus PCS on a one-year license (which are never sold separately from
  each other) is $600,000; and
— the economic life of Product H is eight years.
Customer pays an upfront fee of $2,400,000 for the license and the first year of
the mandatory PCS. The contract states that Customer must pay a fee of
$400,000 each year to renew the mandatory PCS. After five years, Customer
may choose not to renew the PCS, but retains its right to use Product H.
Analysis
Identify the performance obligations
ABC concludes that the mandatory PCS provision means that the enforceable
rights and obligations of the parties under the contract are for only a one-year
term license to Product H and one year of PCS. Absent Customer deciding to
renew PCS, Customer only has a right to a one-year license and to one year
of PCS.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              208
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




However, the upfront fee ($2.4 million) is substantially larger than the fee
Customer would pay during the potential renewal periods ($400,000 per year in
Years 2-5). Therefore, ABC concludes that the initial contract for Year 1 includes
a material right with respect to renewing the one-year license and related PCS
for Years 2-4. In addition, ABC concludes that Customer is obtaining a material
right to a perpetual license (bundled with one year of PCS) that it will control
upon renewing PCS for Year 5. That is, upon accepting the option to renew PCS
for Year 5 at the beginning of Year 5 (which includes accepting its obligation to
pay the Year 5 PCS fee), Customer now controls a perpetual right to use
Product H.
Consequently, at contract inception there are the following performance
obligations in the contract:
— a one-year license to Product H
— one year of PCS related to Product H
— material rights to obtain further one-year licenses to Product H and related
  PCS in each of Years 2-4
— a material right to obtain a perpetual license to Product H and one-year of
  related PCS at the beginning of Year 5.
Estimate option stand-alone selling price
The perpetual license to Product H that Customer may acquire at the beginning
of Year 5 is not similar to the one-year term licenses Customer obtains initially
and has the right to obtain in Years 2-4. Therefore, ABC cannot apply the
practical alternative in paragraph 606-10-55-45; ABC must estimate the stand-
alone selling price of the option to obtain a perpetual license to Product H.
Various facts and circumstances, including the estimated stand-alone selling
price of a perpetual license to Product H (which may be highly variable or
uncertain) and consideration of breakage (i.e. the likelihood that Customer will
forgo its material right by choosing not to renew PCS for Years 2-5), will affect
the estimated stand-alone selling price of the perpetual license option.
Transaction price allocation
Assume the following stand-alone selling prices are estimated for the material
rights in the contract.

                                                                                        Probability           Stand-alone
 Option                                                           Discount              of exercise           selling price
 Year 2 one-year license/PCS option                               $200,000                        98%              $196,000
 Year 3 one-year license/PCS option                                 200,000                       95%                190,000
 Year 4 one-year license/PCS option                                 200,000                       91%                182,000
 Year 5 perpetual license/one-year of
 PCS option                                                     $2,000,000                        90%            $1,800,000

Consequently, the contract inception relative stand-alone selling price allocation
is as follows (rounded to nearest dollar and tenth of a percent):
                                                             Stand-alone                  Relative                Allocated
 Performance Obligation                                      selling price           allocation %                  amount
 Year 1 License/PCS                                               $600,000                     20.2%               $485,175
 Year 2 option                                                      196,000                      6.6%                158,490




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              209
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                                                             Stand-alone                  Relative                Allocated
 Performance Obligation                                      selling price           allocation %                  amount
 Year 3 option                                                      190,000                      6.4%                153,639
 Year 4 option                                                      182,000                      6.1%                147,170
 Year 5 option                                                   1,800,000                     60.7%              1,455,526
                                                                $2,968,000                   100.0%              $2,400,000

The $485,175 allocated to Year 1 is then allocated between the license and the
PCS based on the relative stand-alone selling price of each. ABC will recognize
the portion allocated to the license at the beginning of Year 1 and recognize the
portion allocated to the PCS over the one-year PCS period.
The amounts allocated to the options will remain deferred (i.e. as contract
liabilities) until the respective option is exercised. When the option is exercised,
the consideration for the additional license and PCS (e.g. the $400,000 fee
applicable to Year 2) is added to the amount allocated to the Year 2 option for a
total amount of consideration of $558,490. Consistent with the accounting for
the license and PCS in Year 1, ABC will allocate the $558,490 between the
license and PCS on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. ABC will recognize
the portion allocated to the license at the beginning of Year 2 and recognize the
portion allocated to the PCS over the one-year PCS period.
The accounting for Years 3-5 will generally be consistent with that for Year 2
other than with respect to the amounts recognized (due to the differing
amounts allocated to the options).
Note:
The preceding two paragraphs assume that ABC accounts for the exercise of the Year 2
material right as a continuation of the existing contract. At the March 2015 TRG meeting,
TRG members generally agreed that it would also be acceptable for an entity to account
for the exercise of a material right as a contract modification (see TRG Agenda Papers
Nos. 32 and 34). That ‘contract modification’ approach would result in different
accounting from that outlined in the preceding paragraphs as it would generally account
for each exercise of one of the options in the contract as a termination of the existing
contract and the creation of a new contract. For purposes of this example, we have not
illustrated the results of that approach.



                  Example C200.3
                  Software license and mandatory PCS – license fee
                  paid over time
Scenario 1: Entire license fee is legally enforceable if Customer
cancels PCS
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide a three-year license
to Product T and also to provide both technical support services and any
updates, upgrades and enhancements developed (collectively, PCS) for
one year. If Customer does not renew PCS for Years 2 and 3 it loses the right to
use the software – i.e. there is a mandatory PCS provision in the contract.
Under the terms of the contract, Customer pays the $300,000 license fee in
three equal installments of $100,000 at the beginning of each year of the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              210
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




license term. PCS is $60,000 each year, payable in advance. Customer has a
legally enforceable obligation to pay the entire $300,000 license fee even if it
chooses not to renew PCS in either Year 2 or Year 3 (note: even if ABC has a
history of not enforcing remaining license fee installments if the PCS is not
renewed, ABC may still have an enforceable right to such fees – see
Question B140). The stand-alone selling price for ABC’s PCS on term licenses
at contract inception is $60,000.
ABC determines that the one-year PCS service is a single performance obligation
(see Question C150) and is distinct from the license to Product T. Despite the fact
the license fee is paid over time, rather than upfront, the conclusion in this
scenario is consistent with that in Example C200.1. This is because the license
fee is legally enforceable regardless of whether Customer renews PCS;
therefore, the timing of payment of the license fee alone does not change the
accounting from that outlined in Example C200.1, with the exception that there
may be a significant financing component in the contract as a result of Customer
paying for the license to Product T over time (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine
the transaction price).
Scenario 2: The unpaid portion of the license fee is no longer owed if
Customer cancels PCS
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 1 except that if Customer does not
renew PCS for Year 2 or Year 3, the remaining balance of the license fee is no
longer owed by Customer.
In this case, the substance of the contract is a one-year term license with co-
terminus PCS. Customer, in effect, has an option each year to renew both the
license and the PCS for another year. Consequently, the transaction price at
contract inception is only the enforceable $160,000 ($100,000 Year 1 license
payment + $60,000 Year 1 PCS payment). Consistent with Scenario 1, ABC
determines that the PCS is a single performance obligation that is distinct from
the one-year license to Product T. Consequently, ABC recognizes the portion of
that $160,000 transaction price allocable to the Product T license at the
beginning of the one-year term (which is when Customer obtains control of the
license) and the portion allocable to the PCS over the one-year term using an
appropriate measure of progress (see Question C130).
ABC’s accounting for the contract in Years 2 and 3 will, absent any modification
to the contract, be consistent with that for Year 1.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, the contract could be characterized as a perpetual
license or a multi-year time-based license (i.e. the contract may be
worded/structured in such manner). This is because the customer loses the
continued right to use the software if PCS is not renewed, so in substance the
arrangement was considered to be a series of one-year time-based licenses
bundled with annual PCS.
Because the renewal payments after the initial one-year PCS period in a
mandatory PCS scenario apply to both the continued use of the license and the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              211
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




PCS renewal, the entity did not have a separate renewal rate for PCS.
Therefore, the entity could not establish VSOE of fair value for PCS and could
not separate the one-year time-based license from the one-year PCS.
As a result, in practice, either of the following accounting policies were
considered acceptable alternatives to account for the amounts received in the
initial term of the arrangement.
— Recognize the entire initial fee for the license/PCS bundle over the initial
  term, provided such term was considered substantive, and recognize
  renewal fees in subsequent years over the respective renewal periods.
— Defer and amortize the incremental portion of the initial fee for the
  license/PCS bundle (i.e. the amount of the initial fee that was greater than
  the stated renewal period fee) over the estimated term of the arrangement.
  If the term of the arrangement was not determinable, then the incremental
  portion of the initial fee was deferred and amortized over the economic life
  of the software product. If the customer elected not to renew PCS in a
  future period, any remaining deferred revenue was recognized at that time.
The accounting model for mandatory PCS arrangements outlined in the
Question will represent a significant change for most entities with these
arrangements from the accounting under legacy US GAAP.



                  Question C210
                  If a customer reinstates technical support and/or
                  unspecified update, upgrade and enhancement
                  rights after allowing them to lapse, are those
                  services distinct from any promises to provide
                  updated or enhanced software (i.e. releases the
                  customer did not get during the lapse) as part of
                  the reinstatement?

  Reinstated PCS
  For perpetual or time-based licensing arrangements in which the customer
  has canceled PCS (or allowed PCS to lapse), entities frequently charge an
  additional fee to customers who wish to reinstate the PCS arrangement.
  In certain circumstances, the customer will receive previously released
  upgrades or enhancements upon reinstatement of an inactive PCS
  arrangement. Contractual provisions requiring incremental fees to reinstate a
  PCS arrangement that has lapsed are common in the software industry. Such
  fees may be in the form of a penalty or they may be equivalent to the actual
  PCS fees that would have been charged had the customer remained a
  current PCS subscriber (i.e. back PCS).
  In addition, there may be circumstances where the entity offers an amnesty
  program to persuade customers to reinstate the PCS that has elapsed under
  the arrangement. Under such a program, upon reinstatement of the inactive
  PCS the entity may offer to waive a portion or all of the previously released




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              212
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




  upgrades or enhancements and any penalties that may be due contractually
  under the arrangement. Upon reinstatement of the PCS, such arrangement
  would be accounted for as a concession because a substantive incremental
  payment was waived by the entity. However, we believe that an amnesty
  program that is offered once to all its customers is more akin to a sales
  incentive and generally does not establish a history of concessions.


Interpretive response: The characterization of the contract as one for a
‘reinstatement’ of PCS or otherwise does not matter. Such an arrangement,
however characterized, is no different from any other new contract for one or
more specified software licenses (e.g. an upgrade to Version 3.0 and provision
of an enhancement in the form of a new module), technical support services
and a right to future unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements.
Regardless of whether the entity does or does not charge a ‘reinstatement fee’,
or the amount of any such fee, the entity allocates a portion of the transaction
price to any previously released upgrades or enhancements the customer will
specifically receive as part of the arrangement – i.e. those are specified
upgrades or enhancements. This might result in the entity recognizing a
contract asset if there are no fees paid by the customer under the
reinstatement, or if those fees are less than the transaction price allocated to
those items, at the time the previously released upgrades or enhancements are
transferred to the customer.
The considerations to determine whether any specified software licenses or
upgrades, technical support services and unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement
rights are distinct in this context are consistent with those outlined in
Questions C150 – C170.
If, at contract inception, (1) there is a reasonable expectation that the customer
will cancel PCS and later reinstate PCS and (2) the entity has a pattern (i.e.
customary business practice) of providing previously released updates,
upgrades and enhancements without charging a substantive incremental fee
upon PCS reinstatement, this may result in a conclusion that the customer’s
payment of the current contract fees also provides the customer with a material
right to previously released updates, upgrades and enhancements upon
reinstatement of PCS in the future. Therefore, entities may want to ensure that
in PCS reinstatement scenarios they charge a substantive fee for previously
released updates, upgrades and enhancements to avoid evaluating, and
potentially accounting for, a material right.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, the appropriate revenue recognition treatment for a
transaction to reinstate an inactive PCS arrangement depended on whether the
renewal transaction involved multiple elements.
When a customer received previously released upgrades upon reinstatement of
an inactive PCS arrangement, the reinstatement arrangement was equivalent to




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              213
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




a multiple-element transaction to purchase software upgrades and PCS from
the date of reinstatement.
When VSOE existed for the go-forward PCS but not for the software elements,
which may include new software licenses as well as previously released
upgrades or enhancements, the residual method was applied to assign the
arrangement consideration to the elements of the arrangement. Application of
the residual method could result in the recognition of all or a portion of the PCS
reinstatement fee upon delivery of the software element(s).
However, it was generally not appropriate to recognize revenue upfront in a
single-element PCS reinstatement arrangement where (1) the customer was
not entitled to receive upgrades or enhancements previously provided to active
PCS subscribers or (2) the customer was entitled to receive upgrades or
enhancements previously provided to active PCS subscribers, but no upgrades
or enhancements were released during the period(s) in which the customer’s
PCS was inactive. Instead, when a PCS renewal arrangement did not involve
multiple elements, any reinstatement fee charged at inception of the PCS
renewal, regardless of form, was ascribed to the future PCS services. It was
not deemed appropriate to recognize the PCS reinstatement fee upon renewal
in those situations because the reinstatement itself did not constitute a
separate deliverable of the arrangement, even if the related agreements state
that the fee is attributable to PCS for prior periods.
In general, the accounting for PCS reinstatements will not be significantly
different under Topic 606, with the following exceptions.
— The amounts allocated to the various elements in a multiple-element
  reinstatement may differ because of the changes in the transaction price
  measurement and allocation guidance (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine
  the transaction price and Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price
  to the performance obligations in the contract).
— Under legacy US GAAP, if the reinstatement included rights to previously
  released updates, upgrades or enhancements, and a commensurate fee was
  not charged for those items, provision thereof was treated as a concession to
  the customer. No revenue was recognized upon delivery of those upgrades
  or enhancements if any payments to be received from the customer were
  contingent on future performance. Under Topic 606, revenue will generally be
  recognized upon transfer of the previously released upgrades and
  enhancements, even if all of the consideration in the contract is contingent
  on the provision of future PCS. As noted in the question, the consideration in
  the contract for the reinstated PCS may include consideration from a previous
  contract deferred as a material right to receive the previously released
  updates, upgrades or enhancements for free or at a significant discount.


Professional services
Software and SaaS contracts frequently include professional services. For
purposes of evaluating whether professional services sold in a contract with
one or more software licenses, and potentially additional goods or services such
as PCS or hosting services or specified software upgrades, the basic categories
of professional services need to be understood.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              214
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




In general, the following are the principal types of professional services that
may be included in a bundled software arrangement:
— Implementation services. Software implementation generally includes
  tasks such as (not exhaustive): software selection, defining software
  requirements, implementation planning, system architecture and network
  planning, software installation, software and systems integration and
  interfacing, testing of the installed software/system, post-deployment
  review.
      Implementation services are often available from the software vendor
      providing the license(s), as well as from alternate providers. Implementation
      service can also, typically, be at least partially performed by the customer’s
      in-house personnel.
      Software implementation services can range from being non-complex to
      significantly complex. Often the level of complexity of the implementation
      services determines whether parties other than the entity can perform all or
      a significant portion of the services. However, in some cases, there are
      sophisticated service providers that can provide even extremely complex
      implementation services, including services that require access to the
      software code – e.g. if the service provider has an access permission
      agreement with the software provider.
— Configuration services. Configuration refers to how a system is set up, or
  the assortment of components that make up the system. With respect to
  software, typical configuration services relate to the setting of various
  ‘flags’ or ‘switches’ within the software, or defining certain values or
  parameters, to implement a particular set-up for the software’s existing
  functionality. Configuration does not involve the modification or writing of
  additional software code, but rather involves setting up the software’s
  existing code to function in a particular way.
— Customization services. A software vendor or another service provider
  provides customization services that typically involve modifying existing
  software code in the application or writing additional code. The effect of
  significantly altering or adding software code is generally to change, or
  create additional, functionalities within the software.
— Training services. Software vendors and other service providers often
  offer their customers services to train their personnel on the use of, and in
  some cases how to provide at least first-tier support for, licensed or
  purchased software.
— Other consulting services. Software vendors and other consulting firms
  and service providers may provide a variety of ‘other’ services that may not
  be directly linked to a specific software application.
SaaS arrangements also frequently include professional services. Many of the
services SaaS providers offer are similar to those provided for on-premise
software solutions. For example, implementation services in SaaS
arrangements will frequently include configuration and/or interfacing, data
migration/conversion, user acceptance testing and end-user training.
Customization of the SaaS (e.g. developing additional functionalities) may also
occur in some cases.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              215
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question C220
                  What should a SaaS provider consider in evaluating
                  if upfront services it provides in a SaaS
                  arrangement are a promised service or solely an
                  administrative task/set-up activity that does not
                  transfer a good or service to the customer?
Interpretive response: Set-up activities, as opposed to promised services,
provide no incremental benefit to the customer beyond that which they will
receive from access to the hosted application. In other words, set-up activities
represent those tasks that are necessary for the customer to begin to use and
benefit from the hosted application. For example, a SaaS provider may
perform tasks that range from simple activation activities necessary for the
customer to access the web-based software application to more complex
upfront activities needed to allow the customer to access the SaaS services
from the customer’s IT platform. In either case, those tasks represent
activities that are necessary solely for the customer to access and begin to
use the hosted application.
In contrast, promised services provide some measure of benefit beyond that of
solely being able to access and use the hosted software application. Examples
of promised services include: assisting the customer in interfacing their existing
operating software (e.g. an ERP system) with the hosted software application,
performing customer-specific configuration services so that the software will
operate most effectively in the customer’s business environment, providing
training services to permit the customer to use the application effectively, and
performing data migration/conversion services related to the customer’s
existing data that the customer would otherwise have to perform itself (or
obtain from a third party).
If another entity provides the services in question (e.g. a consulting services
entity provides data conversion/migration), we would generally expect those
would be promised services when provided by the software entity, rather than
set-up activities. However, the fact that another entity does not provide those
services is not determinative that they are set-up activities when performed by
the software entity.



                  Example C220.1
                  Set-up activities vs implementation services in a
                  SaaS arrangement
ABC Corp. enters into a contract to provide Customer with access to its SaaS
for three years.
As part of the contract, before commencement of the SaaS term, ABC will set
up the user interface that Customer will need to access the online application,
and will also undertake data conversion and migration activities for Customer to
configure and move its relevant, existing data from Customer’s current on-




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              216
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




premise solution to ABC’s hosted environment. ABC will also provide training to
relevant Customer personnel on use of ABC’s hosted application.
ABC evaluates each of the activities it agrees to undertake as part of the
contract: the set-up of the user interface, data conversion and migration
activities, and training of Customer’s personnel.
ABC concludes that set-up of the user interface is a set-up activity, rather than a
promised service to Customer. It provides no incremental benefit to Customer
beyond permitting Customer to access and use the hosted application.
In contrast, the data conversion and migration activities, and the training of
Customer’s personnel, are services that will provide Customer with incremental
benefits beyond just the ability to access and use the hosted application. The
data conversion and migration activities ABC will perform would otherwise
need to be performed by Customer or another service provider and, even
though it would be inefficient, Customer would be able to use the hosted
application for new transactions without converting and migrating its old data.
The training of Customer’s personnel will permit Customer to effectively use
ABC’s hosted application. In both cases, the data conversion/migration and the
training, ABC’s activities are doing more than simply setting up or enabling
Customer to access and use the SaaS.



                  Question C230
                  How should an entity evaluate whether
                  professional services to significantly customize or
                  modify the licensed software are distinct from the
                  associated software license?
Interpretive response: Professional services provided in a software licensing
arrangement can vary greatly from contract to contract; therefore, the contract-
specific facts and circumstances should always be considered. However, in
general, a software license and professional services to significantly modify or
customize that software for the customer’s use will comprise a single
performance obligation, as will an entity’s services to produce a new software
application for a customer and grant a license thereto. The basis for that
conclusion is likely to differ depending on whether the nature of the
arrangement is customizing or modifying an existing software product for the
customer or producing new software.
New software production
A production scenario entails the development of a new, customized software
product for a customer. The customer cannot use and benefit from the license
to the customized software product until the development is complete – i.e.
control of the software license does not transfer until the development is
complete.
This ordering of how the license and the associated services are transferred to
the customer affects the assessment of whether those items are capable of
being distinct. The license is not transferred before the performance of the
development services and is, by nature of it being a new, customized software




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              217
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




product, not licensed separately by the entity. Therefore, the development
services do not provide benefit to the customer on their own or with any then-
readily available resource.
Because the development services are not capable of being distinct, the
development services are combined with the license to the developed software
that will be transferred to the customer upon completion of the development
services into a single performance obligation.
Customizing or modifying an existing software product
In a modification/customization scenario, if the customer obtains the right to
use and benefit from the underlying software (i.e. is granted the license to use
the software that will be modified/customized by the entity’s services), the
software license and the customization services will typically be capable of
being distinct. This is because the customer can benefit from the:
— underlying software on its own or together with other readily available
  resources (see Question C110); and
— customization services together with the delivered license to the underlying
  software.
However, in a software contract that includes professional services that
significantly modify or customize the customer’s instance of the software, the
entity’s promise to transfer the software license and its promise to provide the
professional services will typically not be separately identifiable. This is
because:
— the underlying software and the customization services are inputs to the
  combined output (i.e. the customized software) for which the customer has
  contracted, such that the entity is providing a significant integration service
  of combining those inputs into that combined output; and
— the customization services are significantly modifying and/or customizing
  the software license.
The separately identifiable evaluation will generally not be affected by whether
another entity could provide the professional services. This is because that
would not affect whether the entity is providing a significant integration service
in this contract or that the professional services are significantly modifying
and/or customizing the software license.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy Subtopic 985-605 specified that if a software arrangement required
significant production, modification or customization of the software, the entire
arrangement was accounted for using contract accounting. This is because, in
an arrangement that involved significant production, modification or
customization of the licensed software, the service element is essential to the
functionality of the software.
Therefore, the conclusion that a software license and services to produce,
modify or customize the licensed software will generally constitute a single




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              218
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




performance obligation under Topic 606 is consistent with the unit of account
conclusion under legacy US GAAP for those same elements. Questions F200
and F260, respectively, discuss whether a single performance obligation
comprised of a software license and significant customization services is
satisfied over time or at a point in time and appropriate measures of progress to
apply (i.e. timing of revenue recognition) if the performance obligation is
satisfied over time.



                  Example C230.1
                  Software license and customization services
ABC Corp. licenses trust asset management system software called Product B.
The Product B software enables users, typically large financial institutions, to
access and value individual US dollar denominated trust account portfolios on a
real-time basis. Product B functions as designed without any customization or
modification services and can be implemented without ABC’s assistance in
most cases.
ABC entered into a specific contract with Customer, a large bank, to grant a
license to the Product B software and to provide services to modify the
customer’s instance of the software. This includes modification of the software
code and configuration of certain modified and off-the-shelf settings to allow
Customer to access and value its trust account portfolios in multiple foreign
currencies in addition to US dollars. The modification and configuration
significantly affect the Customer’s ability to use the Product B software as it
intends. ABC expects that it will take approximately 18 months to perform
the services.
ABC concludes that there are two promised goods and services in this contract:
the software license, and the professional services to customize and configure
the software.
In this example, the software license and the professional services are each
capable of being distinct. Customer could derive benefit from the license for
Product B on its own or with readily available implementation services.
Customer can benefit from the professional services together with the license
to Product B that is transferred at contract inception.
However, ABC determines that the promises to transfer a license to Product B
and to provide the associated professional services are not separately
identifiable in the context of the contract – i.e. there is a single performance
obligation. This is because:
— Product B in its off-the-shelf form and the professional services to be
  applied to that software to modify the software code and effect the
  required configuration are both inputs to the combined output the customer
  has contracted for (i.e. the customized software).
— The professional services will significantly modify and customize the
  customer’s instance of the Product B software. Note that the configuration
  aspect of the professional services does not modify or customize the
  software because these services merely configure functionality that




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              219
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




      already exists in the software code; no software code is modified or
      additionally written.



                  Question C240
                  How should an entity evaluate whether
                  implementation and installation-type services are
                  distinct from the associated software license?
Interpretive response: The nature and extent of professional services provided in
a software licensing arrangement can vary greatly from contract to contract;
therefore, the contract-specific facts and circumstances should always be
considered. However, in general, a software license and related professional
services that are principally implementation in nature and that are not complex will
be distinct from each other; therefore, they are separate performance obligations.
Question C260 discusses additional considerations with respect to more
complex implementation services.
Provide benefit on their own or together with other readily available
resources
Implementation services do not significantly change the functionality of the
software – i.e. implementation services do not involve changing or appending
software code. Therefore, entities will typically conclude that:
— the software provides benefit to the customer on its own or together with
  other implementation services generally available from alternate providers;
  but
— the services provide benefit to the customer together with the software
  license that is generally transferred upfront.
In some arrangements, the license term does not begin until the
implementation services are completed. In that case, the license is not
transferred to the customer until after the implementation services are
completed because the customer is not able to use and benefit from the
software until the license term commences (see Question F30).
However, even in that circumstance, the customer can benefit from the
implementation services together with a ‘readily available resource’ if the entity
sells licenses to the software separately. The software license is a readily
available resource if the entity either sells licenses to customers without
implementation services or sells renewal licenses to customers separately. This
is because a readily available resource is defined as ‘a good or service that is
sold separately (by the entity or another entity)’. [606-10-25-20]
As a further observation, even if the entity only sells those licenses together
with PCS, such that it does not sell the software license separately, the bundle
containing the license and the PCS can be the readily available resource with
which the customer can benefit from the implementation services.
Separately identifiable from other promises in the contract
An entity’s promises to transfer a software license and to provide professional
services that do not significantly modify or customize (i.e. change) the licensed



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              220
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




software will typically be separately identifiable. Because implementation
services do not modify or customize the licensed software, the software
license and the implementation services are not inputs to a combined output.
Rather, the implementation services are applied to the licensed software;
therefore, the entity is not providing a significant integration service.
Further, the software license and implementation services typically will not
each significantly affect the other, and therefore are not highly interrelated or
interdependent in this contract. While the implementation services necessarily
depend on the transfer of the software license – i.e. the customer can only
benefit from the services after it has obtained the software license – in general,
the implementation services do not significantly affect the software license.
The entity will be able to fulfill its promise to transfer the software license
independently of its promise to provide the implementation services. That is,
because the licensed software will not be changed by the entity’s services,
when (or whether) it performs the implementation services does not affect the
entity’s ability to fulfill its promise to transfer the software license.



                  Example C240.1
                  Software and implementation services
ABC Corp. licenses Software Product A to Customer on a perpetual basis along
with specified implementation services. The implementation services consist of
developing non-complex interfaces, performing data conversion and migration,
loading/installing the software, and running test data. Product A can be used by
the customer upon basic installation without any significant customization or
ABC providing the specified implementation services.
Due to the magnitude of global operations of Customer, the implementation
services are expected to take 12-15 months to complete. The stated fees for
the implementation services exceed the fees attributable to the Product A
license. ABC is an experienced provider of implementation services for Product
A and has a history of successfully providing services of this nature to the
satisfaction of customers. The services do not carry a significant degree of risk
or unique acceptance criteria. Customer is expected to assign internal IT
personnel to work closely with ABC on the implementation effort, including
project management.
ABC concludes that the software license to Product A and the implementation
services (which are determined to be a single performance obligation in this
contract – see Question C250) are each capable of being distinct.
The Product A software is fully functional to its off-the-shelf specifications as
soon as it is installed in Customer’s IT environment. This means that Customer is
able to benefit from the software either on its own (if its own personnel could
install the Product A software) or together with basic installation services that are
readily available from numerous alternate providers.
Customer can benefit from the implementation services together with the
software license transferred upfront.
ABC also concludes that its promises to transfer the Product A license and to
provide the implementation services are separately identifiable. This is because



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              221
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




the implementation services are not significantly modifying or customizing the
software; the off-the-shelf software and ABC’s services are, in effect, each
outputs of this contract rather than inputs to a combined output of the contract.
ABC determines that, because the contracted services will not change the
licensed software (i.e. modify or customize the software code), the services do
not significantly affect the software license such that ABC would be unable to
fulfill its promise to transfer the software license independently from fulfilling its
promise to implement that software. Consequently, the services and the
license are not highly interrelated or interdependent in this contract.
Because the Product A license and the implementation services are distinct
from each other in this contract, the license and the services are separate
performance obligations.



                  Question C250
                  If an entity provides multiple implementation
                  services, are each of those services a separate
                  performance obligation?
Interpretive response: What entities consider to be ‘implementation services’
may actually encompass a number of services that would each be distinct.
Examples include the loading of software, data conversion and migration,
building interfaces and end-user acceptance testing.
For example, an entity’s services to convert and migrate customer data to its
software may be distinct from its services to build certain interfaces or provide
training to customer personnel; each of those services may be able to be
fulfilled, and provide benefit to the customer, independently, such that they are
separate performance obligations.
However, it may frequently be the case that either:
— the various implementation services will be provided over the same
  implementation period and have the same pattern of transfer to the
  customer – e.g. the entity may use a cost-to-cost or labor hours input
  method to measure progress toward the satisfaction of each promised
  service; or
— the service will not be provided concurrently, but the measure of progress
  for each service is the same and there would be a consistent transaction
  price allocation between each service – e.g. because the entity’s stand-
  alone selling price for its professional services is its observable hourly rate,
  which is consistent between the services.
In either case, the entity is permitted to account for the multiple services as a
single performance obligation because the accounting outcome should be the
same as accounting for those services as separate performance obligations.
[ASU 2014-09.BC116]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              222
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question C260
                  How does an entity evaluate whether
                  implementation services that are complex, but do
                  not significantly customize or modify the software,
                  are distinct from the associated software license?
Interpretive response: Implementation services that consist principally of tasks
or activities such as implementation planning, loading of software, training of
customer personnel, data conversion or migration, building simple interfaces,
running test data, user acceptance testing, and assisting in the development
and documentation of procedures are not generally considered ‘complex’.
Question C240 addresses whether non-complex implementation services are
distinct from the associated software license(s).
What constitutes complex implementation services will be a matter of
judgment, but we believe such services include tasks such as developing
complex interfaces and would generally take more time to complete than those
of a simple nature. The complexity of the implementation services might be
further evidenced if the customer’s personnel or other service providers could
not perform significant portions of the services.
Distinguishing complex interfaces from those of a simple nature will require
judgment because there is no standard definition of a ‘complex interface’. Over
time, practice has developed whereby a number of factors are assessed in
attempting to delineate simple from complex interfaces. We believe that the
following factors are relevant to identifying complex interfaces and being able to
apply Topic 606’s separation model to services that include the building of such
interfaces. This list is not exhaustive, and the presence or absence of one of the
factors would not necessarily be conclusive of whether requested interfaces
are complex.
— The time and effort to complete the interfaces. If the building of the
  requested interfaces will take a substantial amount of time and/or extensive
  effort to complete, this indicates a greater level of complexity.
— Whether another provider or in-house customer personnel could
  complete the interfaces. If another service provider or the customer’s in-
  house IT personnel could not complete (or substantially complete) the
  interfaces (e.g. because it requires access to the software’s source code),
  this indicates a greater level of complexity. The evaluation of this factor is
  not affected by any contractual restrictions – e.g. any restriction in the
  contract prohibiting the customer from using an alternate provider.
— Whether there is a significant level of risk in successfully completing
  the interfaces. If there is a significant level of uncertainty with respect to
  the entity’s ability to complete the interfaces (which may be evidenced by
  the contract’s payment terms or acceptance, termination or cancellation
  provisions), this would suggest that the requested interfaces are of a more
  complex nature.
Capable of being distinct
The evaluation of complex implementation services will require judgment.
However, we believe a software license and even complex implementation



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              223
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




services will generally be capable of being distinct for the same reasons
outlined in Question C240 (implementation services in general).
Separately identifiable
We expect that an entity’s promise to transfer a software license and provide
even complex implementation services will be separately identifiable in most
cases. The analysis leading to that conclusion will likely be consistent with that
outlined in Question C240. This is because even complex implementation
services are not modifying or customizing the licensed software (i.e. changing
or appending the software code) or vice versa, and the license and the services
do not each significantly affect the other – i.e. while the services necessarily
depend upon the license, in general, the entity can fulfill its obligation to
transfer the software license independently of fulfilling its obligation to provide
the services (e.g. build complex interfaces).
However, in more limited circumstances, an entity may conclude that the
entity’s promise to provide complex implementation services is not separately
identifiable from its promise to transfer the software license(s) in the contract.
Consider the following:
— In some contracts, the entity may be providing a significant integration
  service (as described in paragraph 606-10-25-21(a)), using the licensed
  software and those interfaces as inputs to produce a ‘solution’ that is the
  combined output the customer entered into the contract to obtain. This
  might be the case if the act of interfacing the licensed software and the
  software/systems with which the licensed software will interface will
  create combined functionality – i.e. functionality that is dependent on both
  the licensed software (e.g. Product A) and the other software with which
  the licensed software is interfaced (e.g. Product B). The situation described
  in this bullet point does not refer to a situation in which one (or both)
  applications/systems merely ‘feeds’ the other (e.g. supplies data to the
  other); rather, it refers to a situation in which the interfaces permit the two
  applications, together, to perform additional functions or tasks that neither
  can perform individually. That is, the interface(s) permit Product A and
  Product B to perform additional functions or tasks that cannot be performed
  by either software application separately. The analysis in this regard is
  substantially similar to that outlined in Question C120 for determining
  whether two promised software licenses are distinct from each other.
— The basis for conclusions to ASU 2016-10 states that the principle of
  determining whether two promises are separately identifiable considers
  whether the customer’s ability to derive its intended benefit from the
  contract depends on the entity fulfilling both promises. There may be
  circumstances in which complex implementation services are so integral to
  the customer’s ability to derive benefit from the software license that the
  software license and the services are effectively inputs to a single promise
  to the customer. [ASU 2016-10.BC33(b)]
      For example, if complex interfacing (or a specialized configuration of the
      software) is necessary for the customer to derive its intended benefit from
      the software within the context of the contract and no other entity can
      perform those services (e.g. because the services rely upon proprietary
      knowledge of, or access to, the software source code), that may result in a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              224
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




      conclusion that the software license and the implementation services are a
      single performance obligation.
      We believe that no other entity (including the customer) being capable of
      performing the necessary services is required in order to reach the
      conclusion in the preceding paragraph. If the customer could obtain the
      necessary services from another entity (regardless of any contractual
      restrictions requiring the customer to obtain the services from the entity),
      that would mean the entity’s promise to provide the services is not integral
      to the customer’s ability to derive its intended benefit from the software
      license.



                  Example C260.1
                  Software license and complex implementation
                  services (complex interfacing)
ABC Corp. licenses investment portfolio management software (Product C).
Typically, a customer can use the Product C software upon installation with little
or no customization. ABC entered into a contract with Customer, a large
international bank. Customer has numerous branches and subsidiaries
around the world and wishes to centralize its investment function. The
branches and subsidiaries of Customer operate using various hardware and
operating software.
As part of the arrangement with Customer, ABC agrees to license the Product
C software to Customer and to provide services to build interfaces that will
allow Product C to interface with the various hardware and operating software
used by Customer’s branches and subsidiaries, and with Customer’s current
general-ledger software. It is clear to ABC from the negotiation and contract
drafting process that Customer would view the Product C license as having
relatively limited value without the ability to use it across its many branches
and subsidiaries and being able to interface Product C with its general
ledger software.
ABC estimates that it will take approximately one year to complete the
interfaces, at which time the Product C software will be fully functional in all of
Customer’s branches and subsidiaries. There are no other service providers that
have the requisite expertise to build these interfaces because of the complex
nature of the Product C software; and Customer does not have the requisite
expertise in-house.
ABC concludes that there are two promised goods and services in this contract:
the Product C license, and the implementation services. ABC concludes that it
is providing complex implementation services given the nature of the requested
interfacing; this is because no other party could build the interfaces, and
because of the amount of time and level of effort it will take to complete
the work.
As the first step in its separation analysis, ABC concludes that the Product C
license and the complex implementation services are capable of being distinct
because each is capable of providing benefit to Customer either on its own or
together with other readily available resources. Customer can derive benefit



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              225
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




from the Product C license together with readily available installation services
(basic installation services would be internally available or available from other
service providers) and can derive benefit from the complex implementation
services together with the license to Product C that is transferred at contract
inception.
Next, ABC analyzes whether its promises to transfer the license to Product C
and to provide the implementation services are separately identifiable. In the
first instance, ABC considers the following two factors from paragraph 606-10-
25-21, which support a view that those promises are separately identifiable.
— While ABC’s services to develop interfaces for Customer are an important
  component of the contract, the development of the interfaces will not
  result in new or combined functionalities that rely on Product C and
  Customer’s existing systems. Consequently, Product C and the
  implementation services are not inputs to a combined output and ABC is
  not providing a significant integration service in this contract.
— The implementation services will not significantly modify or customize the
  customer’s licensed instance of Product C or vice versa. This fact also
  further supports that the Product C license and ABC’s implementation
  services are not inputs to a combined output sought by Customer.
Despite the evidence suggested by those factors, ABC concludes that its
promise to transfer the Product C license and its promise to provide the
implementation services in this contract are not separately identifiable. This is
because, within the context of this contract, the Product C license and the
implementation services ABC will provide are both integral to delivering
Customer’s desired output from this contract – i.e. the ability to use Product C
across its global network of branches and subsidiaries – and no other vendor
can provide the complex implementation services. The benefit Customer would
be able to derive from the Product C license alone – i.e. without the
implementation services – is significantly limited as compared to Customer’s
objectives when entering into the contract (as understood by ABC through the
negotiation and sales process); and Customer is unable to perform the
implementation services itself or obtain those services from any other entity
besides ABC. Meanwhile, the benefit Customer would be able to derive from
the implementation services would be nil without the Product C license.
Consequently, the nature of ABC’s overall promise to Customer is to provide an
appropriately interfaced software solution (i.e. the combined item) to which the
base Product C license and its implementation services are inputs.
Because ABC’s promises to transfer the Product C license and to provide the
implementation services are not separately identifiable, they are not distinct and
comprise a single performance obligation.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy Subtopic 985-605 did not provide explicit guidance for determining if
services to build complex interfaces that are necessary for the off-the-shelf
software to be functional in the customer’s environment would result in



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              226
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




contract accounting for the arrangement. However, during the deliberations of
the legacy US GAAP literature, some members of the Accounting Standards
Executive Committee (AcSEC) of the AICPA expressed the view that services
that entail building interfaces to enable off-the-shelf software to function in the
customer’s environment generally would not be considered essential to the
functionality of the software unless the interfaces are very complex. As a result
of that observation, practice developed whereby services to build complex
interfaces were determined to be essential to the functionality of the software.
Therefore, the software license and those services were accounted for as a
single contract accounting unit.
For the reasons outlined above, we do not believe entities should account for a
software license and services that entail complex interfacing as a single
performance obligation in all cases under Topic 606. Therefore, it is possible
that some entities will come to different conclusions about the separability of a
software license and services to build complex interfaces under Topic 606 than
they did under legacy US GAAP.



                  Question C270
                  Are there instances where configuration services,
                  not accompanied by customization services, would
                  not be distinct from the associated software
                  license?
Interpretive response: In general, a software license and associated
configuration services will be separate performance obligations.
A software license for off-the-shelf software is generally capable of being
distinct (see Question C110), while the configuration services are capable of
being distinct together with the software license that is generally transferred
upfront.
Configuration services do not modify or customize (i.e. change) software, but
merely set the parameters for how existing functionalities already written into
the software code will function – e.g. if a software application has the ability to
round numbers, a configuration task may be to set its default rounding to three
decimal points, rather than two or four. Because configuration services do not
modify the software code, a promise to transfer a software license and a
promise to provide configuration services will typically be separately identifiable.
This is supported by an evaluation of the factors in paragraph 606-10-25-21.
— As noted above, neither the software license nor the configuration service
  significantly modify or customize the other.
— Because the configuration services do not modify the licensed software,
  the entity is generally not providing a significant integration service; this is
  notwithstanding that, in a purely literal sense, the existing software and the
  services are both inputs to the configured output that the customer will
  use. Rather it is applying its configuration services to the existing software
  – i.e. in contrast to, for example, using the software and customization
  services as two inputs to produce significantly modified software.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              227
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




— Consistent with the discussion of non-complex implementation services
  (see Question C240), we believe that where professional services will not
  modify the licensed software, those services do not significantly affect the
  software license. Therefore, because the software license and the services
  do not each significantly affect the other, they are not highly interrelated
  or interdependent.
However, consistent in principle with the discussion of complex
implementation services in Question C260, we believe that in more limited
circumstances an entity’s promise to provide configuration services may not be
separately identifiable from its promise to transfer the associated software
license. This is the case when specialized configuration services both:
— are integral (i.e. fundamental) to the customer’s ability to derive its
  intended benefit from the software license – see discussion of ‘integral’ in
  Question C260; and [ASU 2016-10.BC33(b)]
— cannot be performed by another entity (e.g. because the services rely upon
  proprietary knowledge of, or access to, the software code). Contractual
  restrictions requiring the customer to obtain the services from the entity are
  not considered in making this assessment.
In that case, the software license and the configuration services would be a
single performance obligation.



                  Question C280
                  Are the considerations for a SaaS provider different
                  from the considerations for an entity licensing
                  software when determining whether professional
                  services are distinct from the SaaS?
Interpretive response: Question C220 discusses whether upfront activities
performed by the SaaS provider in a SaaS arrangement are determined to
transfer a promised service to the customer.
In most cases, the SaaS provider’s considerations will be similar to those of an
entity that licenses software; however, potentially, there are differences. These
include differences in the considerations about whether professional services
are capable of being distinct, and differences in how an entity should consider
whether the SaaS provider’s promises to the customer are separately
identifiable.
Capable of being distinct
Typically, even if only as a result of customer renewals, SaaS providers sell their
core SaaS offerings separately. This suggests that the core SaaS offering is
capable of being distinct (i.e. in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-20, stand-
alone sales indicate the customer can benefit from the SaaS offering on its
own). It also suggests that upfront professional services are capable of being
distinct. Because the SaaS offering is sold separately, the professional services
will provide benefit to the customer together with the readily available (by virtue
of being sold separately) SaaS offering.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              228
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




However, if a SaaS provider promises to significantly customize its SaaS
offering for a customer (i.e. implement significant new functionalities or
substantially modify existing functionalities), the upfront customization services
may not be capable of being distinct unless the SaaS provider regularly sells
customization services separately – e.g. if the entity sells customization
services to parties that are not SaaS customers of the provider. This would
indicate that the services provide benefit on their own. If those services are not
sold separately, they typically would be incapable of providing benefit to the
customer on their own. In addition, the customer generally could not benefit
from the customization services together with any readily available resource
because neither the SaaS provider, nor any other entity, sells that customized
SaaS offering separately; it presumably does not yet exist until the
customization services are complete.
Consistent with our view under legacy US GAAP, even though an entity may
enter into a new contract with a customer to provide customization services
that would not be combined with an original contract to provide SaaS, those
subsequent customization services are not ‘sold separately’. This is because
with each feature added or change made, there is the implied promise to
provide access to that additional or modified functionality or feature on a hosted
basis. As a result, a subsequent contract to develop or modify features or
functionality is a multiple-element contract, even though the hosting element is
not explicitly stated. Therefore, only through sales of customization services
that will not be accompanied by hosting the customized software will an entity
conclude it sells those services separately.
Separately identifiable
Consistent with previous questions specific to professional services and
software licensing entities (see Questions C240 – C270), professional services
that do not customize the customer’s instance of a SaaS offering will typically
be separately identifiable (i.e. distinct within the context of the contract).
However, in some, more limited, circumstances, an entity’s promise to provide
professional services other than those that customize the SaaS offering may
not be separately identifiable from the entity’s promise to provide the SaaS.
Consistent with the guidance for complex implementation services and
configuration services provided in a software licensing arrangement (see
Questions C260 and C270, respectively), this may be the case if the SaaS-
related services:
— are integral (i.e. fundamental) to the customer’s ability to derive its intended
  benefit from the SaaS offering – see discussion of ‘integral’ in
  Question C260; and [ASU 2016-10.BC33(b)]
— cannot be performed by another entity – if other entities are presently
  capable and available to the customer to provide the services (e.g. there is a
  readily available ‘ecosystem’ for the services), the entity’s services are not
  integral to the customer’s ability to derive its intended benefit from the
  SaaS offering. Contractual restrictions requiring the customer to obtain the
  services from the SaaS provider are not considered in making this
  assessment.
This means that other than for customization services, which will typically not
be distinct from the SaaS in a SaaS arrangement, as long as another entity is




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              229
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




capable of providing the professional services agreed to in the contract, the
entity’s promise to provide professional services and its promise to provide the
SaaS will be separately identifiable.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy SEC guidance in SAB Topic 13.A.3(f), ‘Nonrefundable upfront fees’
provided guidance about determining whether the upfront professional services
in an arrangement represented a separate deliverable that should be accounted
for as a separate element.
Under legacy US GAAP, the upfront services in a hosting arrangement did not
represent a separate deliverable if:
1. the upfront services were essential and inseparable from the hosting
   services;
2. the upfront services had little or no value to the customer on a stand-alone
   basis; or
3. the vendor did not separately sell the upfront services or hosting services
   without causing a significant reduction in the value of the other element.
In those situations, the entire arrangement was accounted for as a single unit of
accounting. Upfront fees were deferred and recognized systematically over the
periods in which the hosting services were performed.
In general, under Topic 606, we believe upfront services that meet the second
criterion above would likely be considered set-up activities, rather than
promised services and, therefore, would be inseparable from the SaaS offering
itself (see Question C220).
The other two criteria applied under legacy US GAAP seem mostly consistent
with the conditions identified in this question for when SaaS-related services
would not be distinct from the related SaaS offering under Topic 606. That is, it
seems that for professional services to be ‘essential’ (first criterion) or for their
absence from the arrangement to result in a significant reduction in value of the
SaaS offering (third criterion), they would also have to be ‘integral’ and
unavailable from an alternative provider.



                  Example C280.1
                  Upfront professional services and SaaS
ABC Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers generally pay a fixed monthly or quarterly fee. Customers are not
permitted to take possession of ABC’s software. ABC and Customer enter into a
contract for Customer to use ABC’s SaaS for three years.
Scenario 1: Distinct services
As part of the contract, ABC agrees to perform a variety of services before
Customer going live with ABC’s SaaS. These services include training




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              230
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Customer’s personnel, converting and migrating Customer’s data from its
current on-premise solution to ABC’s hosted environment, and building an
interface to permit the hosted application to supply data to Customer’s on-
premise general ledger system.
The following additional facts are relevant:
— ABC’s SaaS is regularly sold separately, principally through renewals with
  existing customers, but some new customers also choose not to obtain any
  professional services from ABC.
— The interface needed to permit Customer to interface the SaaS with its
  general ledger system is not complex, such that another entity could build
  that interface.
— There are third-party consultants that provide each of the services
  requested by Customer.
ABC first concludes that each of the promised services provide incremental
benefit to Customer beyond merely permitting Customer to access ABC’s
hosted application (see also Question C220). Therefore, they are promised
services in the contract (rather than set-up activities).
ABC next concludes that the SaaS and each of the promised services are
capable of being distinct:
— ABC regularly sells the SaaS separately (principally through renewals),
  indicating that customers can benefit from the SaaS on its own; and
— Customer can benefit from each of the promised services – i.e. the training,
  data conversion/migration and non-complex interfacing – together with the
  readily available SaaS (the SaaS being ‘readily available’ by virtue of being
  regularly sold separately by ABC).
Finally, ABC concludes that its promises to provide each of the services and to
provide the SaaS are separately identifiable. This conclusion is based on the fact
that Customer could obtain each of the services from other providers or could
perform the services itself. As a result, ABC’s fulfillment of its promise to
provide the requested services is not integral to Customer’s ability to derive its
intended benefit from the contract. As a result, ABC concludes that the SaaS
and each of the services outlined above are separate performance obligations
However, ABC may account for the services as a single performance obligation
if either of the conditions outlined in Question C250 are met.
Scenario 2: Customization services not sold separately
In addition to the services described in Scenario 1, ABC agrees to develop an
additional functionality for the hosted application that it will introduce into the
multi-tenant environment before Customer going live. ABC does not sell
customization services separately and no other entities have access to ABC’s
source code for the application; therefore, no entities other than ABC could
develop the requested functionality.
ABC concludes that the significant customization services in the contract
transfer a promised service to the customer that has incremental benefit to
Customer beyond merely setting Customer up on the existing SaaS offering
such that they are not solely a set-up activity.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              231
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




ABC then concludes that Customer cannot benefit from the significant
customization services on their own and ABC does not sell the customized
SaaS offering separately (nor does any other SaaS provider). This means that
there are no readily available resources with which ABC could benefit from
the customization services such that those customization services are not
capable of being distinct. Because the customization services are not distinct,
the SaaS and the customization services are a single performance obligation
in this contract. Question F240 addresses the accounting for a combined SaaS
and professional services performance obligation.
However, the combined customized SaaS performance obligation is distinct
from the other professional services (i.e. those described in Scenario 1) for the
same reasons that the non-customized SaaS offering and the services are
distinct from each other in Scenario 1.
Scenario 3: Customization services sold separately
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 2, except that ABC regularly provides
customization services separately. For example, ABC provides customization
services for other entities.
ABC concludes that the customization services are capable of providing benefit
to Customer on their own (evidenced by stand-alone sales thereof). The SaaS
offering would also be capable of providing benefit together with the
customization services provided first in the contract.
However, ABC concludes its promises to provide the SaaS and to provide the
customization services are not separately identifiable because:
— the customization services are significantly customizing the core SaaS
  offering; and
— the customization services and ABC’s core SaaS offering are inputs to the
  customized SaaS offering that is the desired output of this contract,
  indicating that ABC is providing a significant integration service in the
  contract.
Therefore, even in this variation of Scenario 2, the SaaS and the customization
services are a single performance obligation. Question F240 addresses the
accounting for a combined SaaS and professional services performance
obligation.



                  Example C280.2
                  SaaS and complex implementation services
ABC Corp. provides access to its proprietary investment portfolio management
software (Product C). Typically, a customer can use the Product C software-as-
a-service (SaaS) with little or no customization once the basic user interface is
established. ABC entered into a contract with Customer, a large international
bank. Customer has numerous branches and subsidiaries around the world that
operate using highly customized on-premise software.
As part of the arrangement with Customer, ABC agrees to provide Customer
access to Product C on a SaaS basis, and to provide services to configure the
Product C software for Customer so that it operates effectively with



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              232
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Customer’s branch/subsidiary software and its ERP system. In addition, ABC
agrees to provide training and data migration services (migrating Customer data
from multiple existing systems to ABC’s hosted environment).
In evaluating its performance obligations in the contract with Customer, ABC
considers first that the Product C SaaS, the configuration services, the training
and the data migration services are each capable of being distinct. The
Product C SaaS is capable of being distinct on the basis that it is sold separately
(i.e. to customers that do not purchase professional services, and to customers
that purchase the SaaS in renewal periods). Each of the services (configuration,
data migration and training) is capable of being distinct because customers
can benefit from each service together with the readily available Product C
SaaS resource.
ABC next concludes that its promises to provide the SaaS and to provide the
configuration services are not separately identifiable. ABC determines that the
specialized configuration it will implement for Customer is integral to
Customer’s intended use of the Product C SaaS across all of its branches and
subsidiaries. Stated another way, without the specialized configuration work,
Customer would not be able to effectively use Product C with its different,
specialized on-premise systems. Further, no resources other than ABC (i.e. no
other service providers or Customer’s personnel) are presently capable of
providing the integral configuration services. Consistent with the discussion in
paragraph BC33(b) of ASU 2016-10, Customer’s ability to derive its intended
benefit from this contract depends on ABC providing both the SaaS and the
configuration services.
Finally, ABC concludes that the training and data migration services are distinct
from the combined SaaS/configuration services performance obligation. The
training and data migration services do not customize the hosted software and
are not integral to Customer’s intended use of the SaaS. The training services,
while useful and valuable, are not essential to Customer’s ability to use the
software in view of the end-user documentation and available technical support
provided as part of the SaaS. Meanwhile, the data migration services can be
provided by many service providers other than ABC and do not affect the
functionality of the SaaS in Customer’s IT environment (in contrast to the
configuration services, which do affect the functionality of the SaaS in
Customer’s IT environment).
Therefore, ABC concludes there are three performance obligations in the
contract with Customer:
— the combined SaaS/configuration services;
— the training services; and
— the data migration services.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              233
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Hardware

                  Question C290
                  How should an entity evaluate whether a license is
                  a component of a tangible good that is integral to
                  the functionality of the good?
Interpretive response: Paragraph 606-10-55-56(a) states that “a license that
forms a component of a tangible good and that is integral to the functionality of
the good” is not distinct.
Topic 606 does not explain whether this statement is based on a conclusion
that the license is, under the circumstances described, not capable of being
distinct (paragraph 606-10-25-19(a)) or whether it is based on a conclusion that
the entity’s promises to transfer the license and the hardware are not
separately identifiable (paragraph 606-10-25-19(b)). Consequently,
paragraph 606-10-55-56(a) could be viewed as establishing a distinct test
specifically for licenses and hardware.
However, we do not believe that was the Boards’ intent. Based on discussion
in the basis for conclusions to ASU 2014-09, we believe the Boards view the
guidance in paragraph 606-10-55-56(a) as merely an application of the core
distinct guidance in paragraphs 606-10-25-19 through 25-22. The basis for
conclusions states that, fundamentally, the guidance in paragraph 606-10-55-
56(a) refers to a situation in which the Boards believe the licensed IP and the
hardware components are inputs to a combined output in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-21(a). [ASU 2014-09.BC406]
Therefore, consistent with other Questions that consider whether two items
are inputs to a combined output (e.g. C120 and C310), we believe the key
question in determining whether a software license is a component of a
tangible good that is integral to the functionality of the good is whether the
software and the hardware components only together produce the essential
functionality of the tangible good. Each element (software and hardware)
contributes substantively to the essential functionality of the tangible good.
The hardware element(s) cannot simply be a delivery mechanism for the
software. For example, a smartphone’s operating system software and its
hardware components work together to produce the smartphone’s essential
functionality (e.g. make calls, connect to the network and internet, take pictures
and video); a customer would not purchase an operating system software
license without a device for the software to operate, and would not purchase a
smartphone without operating system software to perform the key functions
that a smartphone is expected to perform.
In contrast, if the software or the hardware merely provides or contributes
additive functionality rather than essential functionality, the software license is
not an integral component of the tangible good. Continuing the prior example,
many smartphone software applications, even if the applications come installed
on the smartphone at the time of customer purchase, do not contribute to the
smartphone’s essential, combined functionality; they merely provide added




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              234
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




functionality. In that case, the application is not an input to the smartphone – it
is an additive feature.
It may require significant judgment to determine what is essential versus
additive functionality. In making this determination, it may be relevant to
consider whether the tangible good is ever sold without the functionality in
question and whether the functionality in question is optional to the customer.
This might include not only the option to include that functionality in the tangible
good but also the ability to remove that functionality – e.g. uninstall the related
software.
The fact that a software element included in the tangible good is also sold
separately from the tangible good does not affect the assessment of whether
the software and hardware elements function together to deliver that tangible
good’s essential functionality. Nor does the fact that the hardware elements are
sold as a tangible good either without the software element or with a different
software element affect this determination – e.g. a different model of the
tangible good may have different essential functionality.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, the question about whether the sale of a tangible good
included a software license element that functioned together with the
hardware element(s) to deliver the tangible good’s essential functionality was
important to the accounting. This was because of the substantially different
accounting models for software (and software-related services) and other goods
and services.
However, under Topic 606, if the software license is transferred to the
customer at the same time as the tangible good as a whole, the question about
whether the software license is or is not distinct from the tangible good, as well
as any related question as to whether any services in the contract are or are not
software-related, may not matter.
An entity’s evaluation of whether licensed software forms a component of a
tangible good that is integral to its functionality will likely yield similar results as
the evaluation under legacy US GAAP, but that may not always be the case.
This is because the evaluation under Topic 606 is anchored to the notion that
what the entity should be evaluating is whether the software and the hardware
elements of the tangible good are each inputs to a combined good. This is
consistent with how the factor in paragraph 606-10-25-21(a), which was not part
of legacy US GAAP, is evaluated in other circumstances.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              235
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Hosting services and hybrid arrangements

                  Question C300
                  In an arrangement that includes a software license
                  and hosting services, are the software license and
                  the hosting services separate performance
                  obligations?

  Hosting services
  In certain arrangements, rather than selling a software license and related
  services to the customer, the vendor will make the functionalities of the
  software available to the customer through a hosting arrangement. In such
  arrangements, the vendor will run the software application on either its own
  or third-party hardware. Customers can access the software through the
  internet or a dedicated transmission line.


Interpretive response: In contracts that include a software license (see
Chapter A – Scope) and services to host that software, we believe the software
license and those services will generally be distinct from each other
(Question C310 addresses ‘hybrid cloud’ arrangements with cloud-based
services more substantive than simply hosting the licensed software).
The software license will generally be capable of being distinct (as described in
Question C110). The hosting services will also be capable of being distinct
because the customer can benefit from the hosting services together with the
software license that is transferred upfront. The software license in a hosted
software licensing arrangement is transferred to the customer no later than the
point in time it can first access the software through the hosted environment
(see Question F110).
The entity’s promises to transfer the software license and to provide the
hosting services will generally be separately identifiable from each other in the
contract based on the following.
— Neither the license, nor the hosting services, significantly modify or
  customize the other.
— The entity could fulfill those two promises independently from each other.
  By virtue of meeting the criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5 to be considered
  a software licensing arrangement, it should be clear that the entity can
  transfer the software license independent of providing the hosting services.
  Further, the entity could provide the hosting services at any point during the
  arrangement without regard to when it transfers the software license. As a
  consequence of determining that the entity could fulfill the two promises
  independently of each other, the two promises do not each significantly
  affect the other.
— The customer can either host the software itself or obtain hosting services
  from an available third party with no significant diminution in utility of the
  software (a requirement for there to be a software license in the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              236
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




      arrangement). This means that the software license and the hosting
      services are not inputs to a combined output for which the entity is
      providing a significant integration service to create.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The criteria for determining whether an arrangement includes a software
license or, instead, is for SaaS has not changed as a result of the new revenue
guidance. The existing US GAAP guidance for making this determination has
merely been relocated to Subtopic 985-20 from Subtopic 985-605. Chapter A –
Scope discusses application of this guidance in detail.
Under legacy US GAAP, when a software license was present, the software
license was only separable from the hosting services if the vendor had vendor-
specific objective evidence of fair value (VSOE) for the undelivered hosting
services. If the arrangement included additional elements such as PCS, the
software license could only be separated from the service elements if the
software entity had VSOE over all of the undelivered elements (e.g. hosting and
PCS services). If the entity did not have VSOE over one or both of these
elements, which was often the case, the combined arrangement fee was
recognized over the longer of the hosting or PCS term, provided that term was
deemed to be substantive.
Having VSOE is no longer required in order to separate goods and services in
software contracts, and therefore hosting services will generally be a separate
performance obligation from the software licenses and other services (e.g. PCS
or implementation) in the contract. Therefore, entities that enter into software
licensing arrangements with hosting services will generally separate the license
and the hosting services more frequently than they do under legacy US GAAP.



                  Example C300.1
                  Software license, customization services and
                  hosting services
ABC Corp. enters into an arrangement with Customer to license software
Product A, provide significant customization services and provide hosting
services. The hosting services commence upon completion of the
customization, which is expected to take approximately six months.
The hosting services may be renewed in subsequent years for an amount to be
negotiated between ABC and Customer. Customer has a contractual right to
take possession of Product A at any time without significant penalty, and it is
feasible for Customer to run the software on its own hardware.
Because Customer has a contractual right to take possession of Product A at
any time without significant penalty and it is feasible for Customer to run the
software on its hardware, ABC concludes that there is a software license and
associated hosting services in this contract. The significant customization




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              237
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




services transfer a promised service in this contract – i.e. they provide
incremental benefit to the customer; therefore, they constitute a third promised
good or service in the contract.
ABC concludes that the software license and each of the services is capable of
being distinct because the:
— Customer can benefit from the software on its own. Customer can run the
  software on its own hardware, and it is capable of providing economic
  benefit to the customer without significant customization;
— Customer can benefit from the customization services together with the
  software license that is granted at the outset of the contract; and
— Customer can benefit from the hosting services together with the software
  that is transferred to the customer when the hosting services commence
  (i.e. when Customer is able to begin to access the software).
ABC next determines that its promises to transfer the software license and to
provide the customization services are not separately identifiable. This is
because the services are significantly customizing ABC’s software such that the
licensed software and the customization services are inputs to the combined,
customized software offering for which the customer has contracted (see
Example C230.1).
Finally, ABC determines that its single promise to provide the customized
software license (comprised of the license to the software and the
customization services) is separately identifiable from the hosting services. The
hosting services are not changing (i.e. customizing or modifying), or being
changed by, the customized software license such that each is an input to a
combined output. Further, because Customer can host the customized
software on its own, ABC could fulfill its promise to transfer the customized
software license independent of its promise to host the customized software.
And because ABC could provide equivalent hosting services to Customer for
another application, it could also fulfill its promise to provide hosting services
independent of its promise to transfer the customized software license.
Therefore, the customized software license and the hosting services are not
highly interrelated or interdependent.
As a result of the preceding analysis, ABC concludes that there are two
performance obligations in this contract – i.e. the customized software license
and hosting services.



                  Question C310
                  What should an entity consider when evaluating
                  whether a software license and a SaaS element in a
                  ‘hybrid SaaS’ (or ‘hybrid cloud’) arrangement are
                  distinct from each other?
Interpretive response: It is increasingly common for arrangements to include
on-premise or on-device software and SaaS features and functionality (a SaaS
element), e.g. an on-premise software application and file storage (including
sharing and collaboration through a web host), or a SaaS application with an




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              238
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




offline mode. These arrangements are often referred to as hybrid SaaS or hybrid
cloud arrangements.
Paragraph 606-10-55-56(b) states explicitly that a license that the customer can
benefit from only in conjunction with a related service (e.g. as an online service
provided by the entity that enables, by granting a license, the customer to
access content) is not distinct.
If the customer cannot derive benefit from its right to use licensed software
without a contracted SaaS element, that license is not distinct from the SaaS
element. This is the case even if that license is subject to an end-user license
agreement or the license is explicitly stated to be an element of the contract.
We believe this conclusion would extend, not only to a situation in which the
customer receives no independent benefit from the on-premise software
license, but to any situation in which the benefit (or utility) that the customer
can derive from the on-premise software independently is insignificant.
When the on-premise software and the SaaS element each have substantive
functionality on their own, we believe that the evaluation an entity should
undertake in determining whether the on-premise license and the SaaS element
are distinct is broadly consistent with the approach outlined in Question C120
(contract with multiple software licenses).
That is, we believe the underlying principle for the separation model in
Topic 606 (as outlined in paragraphs BC29, BC32 and BC33(b) in ASU 2016-10)
provides that a software license and a SaaS element will typically be distinct if
the two elements are ‘additive’ to each other, but will not be distinct from each
other when those two elements have a ‘transformative’ or significantly
‘magnifying’ effect on each other, or when the customer’s ability to derive its
intended benefit from the contract depends on the software entity transferring
the on-premise software license and providing the SaaS features (see
paragraph BC33(b) in ASU 2016-10).




                  Excerpt from ASU 2016-10

BC29. The Board intends to convey that an entity should evaluate whether the
contract is to deliver (a) multiple goods or services or (b) a combined item or
items that is comprised of the individual goods or services promised in the
contract. That is, entities should evaluate whether the multiple promised goods
or services in the contract are outputs or, instead, are inputs to a combined
item (or items). The inputs to a combined item (or items) concept might be
further explained, in many cases, as those in which an entity’s promise to
transfer the promised goods or services results in a combined item (or items)
that is greater than (or substantively different from) the sum of those promised
(component) goods and services.
BC32. The separately identifiable principle is intended to consider the level of
integration, interrelation, or interdependence among promises to transfer
goods or services. That is, the separately identifiable principle is intended to
evaluate when an entity’s performance in transferring a bundle of goods or
services in a contract is, in substance, fulfilling a single promise to a customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              239
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Therefore, the entity should evaluate whether two or more promised goods or
services (for example, a delivered item and an undelivered item) each
significantly affect the other (and, therefore, are highly interdependent or highly
interrelated) in the contract. The entity should not merely evaluate whether one
item, by its nature, depends on the other (for example, an undelivered item
that would never be obtained by a customer absent the presence of the
delivered item in the contract or the customer having obtained that item in a
different contract)…
BC33. In addition to reframing the factors in the context of a bundle of goods
or services, the Board also: …
b. Observed that the evaluation of whether two or more promises in a
   contract are separately identifiable also considers the utility of the
   promised goods or services (that is, the ability of each good or service to
   provide benefit or value). This is because an entity may be able to fulfill its
   promise to transfer each good or service in a contract independently of the
   other, but each good or service may significantly affect the other’s utility to
   the customer. For example, in Example 10, Case C, or in Example 55, the
   entity’s ability to transfer the initial license is not affected by its promise to
   transfer the updates or vice versa, but the provision (or not) of the updates
   will significantly affect the utility of the licensed intellectual property to the
   customer such that the license and the updates are not separately
   identifiable. They are, in effect, inputs to the combined solution for which
   the customer contracted. The “capable of being distinct” criterion also
   considers the utility of the promised good or service, but merely
   establishes the baseline level of economic substance a good or service
   must have to be “capable of being distinct.” Therefore, utility also is
   relevant in evaluating whether two or more promises in a contract are
   separately identifiable because even if two or more goods or services are
   capable of being distinct because the customer can derive some economic
   benefit from each one, the customer’s ability to derive its intended benefit
   from the contract may depend on the entity transferring each of those
   goods or services.


Stated another way, if the customer obtains a license to Software Product A
and access to SaaS element B, the distinct analysis would frequently hinge on
whether:
— the combination of A + B equals AB (i.e. the combined functionality is the
  sum of the two elements’ individual functionalities), in which case the
  two elements would generally be distinct from each other; or instead
— the combination of A + B equals X (where X is greater than AB). That is, the
  combination of the two elements results in incremental or changed
  functionalities that don’t exist in either element separately or the
  combination of the elements (e.g. ongoing interactions between the
  licensed software and the SaaS) produces an enhanced level of
  functionality that is greater than the aggregate of the individual
  functionalities of the two elements, which would generally suggest the two
  elements are not distinct from each other.
Additionally, the distinct analysis may hinge on whether both elements (i.e. the
on-premise/on-device software and the SaaS element) are essential to fulfilling




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              240
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




the promise to the customer. That is, the nature of the promise to the customer
in a hybrid SaaS arrangement may include the promise of access to important
features or functionalities that depend on both elements. A situation in which
the entity must provide both elements (i.e. there are not substantially equivalent
alternatives for either the licensed software or the SaaS features/functionality
available from other providers), might suggest that the software license and
SaaS elements are not distinct from each other.



                  Example C310.1
                  On-premise software part of a combined solution
ABC Corp. contracts with customers to provide access to its proprietary
solution that permits entities to obtain specific data and manipulate it in
numerous ways. ABC’s solution includes hosted software and an on-premise
application.
The hosted application is proprietary, and ABC never permits customers to take
possession of the hosted application or have another entity host the application.
The on-premise application is licensed to and used by ABC’s customers to view
search results and data presentations processed by the hosted application, but
the on-premise application is unable to produce search results or work with
searched data when not connected to the hosted application.
A customer uses the on-premise application to convert the results into other,
more usable formats (e.g. Word, Excel and PDF) and can send the results to
others using the application. Customers enter into end-user licensing
agreements for the on-premise application as part of the contracting process
that are co-terminus with their access to the hosted application.
The on-premise application has some inherent functionality, i.e. as a stand-alone
application, it permits a user to convert results into other formats and to share
results with others. Notwithstanding that fact, ABC concludes that neither the
on-premise application nor the hosted application provides independent
functionality to customers. Without the hosted application, the on-premise
application would not be able to obtain search results or data reports to convert
or send to others, while a customer cannot obtain the results produced by the
hosted application without the on-premise (user interface) application.
Consequently, ABC concludes that the on-premise application license is not
capable of being distinct. Customers cannot benefit from the on-premise
application on its own (i.e. without the hosted application) or together with
other readily available resources. No other hosted applications exist that a
customer can use with ABC’s on-premise application, and ABC does not sell
access to its hosted application separately. It sells that access only with co-
terminus licenses to the on-premise application.
Because the on-premise application is not capable of being distinct, it is
combined with the hosted application into a single performance obligation. The
substance of that combined performance obligation is the service of providing
access to ABC’s solution for the defined contract period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              241
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Example C310.2
                  SaaS with an ‘offline mode’
ABC Corp.’s core solution to customers is marketed as a Cloud Service;
however, the solution includes on-premise software subject to an end-user
license agreement. Customers can perform many of the solution's
functionalities when they are not connected to ABC's cloud (i.e. they are offline,
using the on-premise software only), but other functionalities are accessible
only if connected to ABC's cloud.
ABC does not sell the on-premise software or functionalities separate from its
cloud service. Consistent with Example C310.1, customers cannot access the
cloud functionalities without the on-premise software; that software is what
permits the customer to access the cloud features.
While there are substantive capabilities available to the customer in offline
mode, without the cloud features, customers would not be able to complete
projects using the software. This is because the offline mode permits the
customer to perform only some tasks toward completing projects using the
software while other significant features and functionalities integral to
completing projects are available only when using the software while
connected to the cloud. The ability to create and complete entire projects is the
reason customers acquire ABC's solution.
There are (1) no other on-premise applications that work together with the cloud
component of the solution and (2) no other on-premise or cloud solutions
available that customers could combine with ABC's on-premise software and
achieve the functionality provided by ABC's overall solution. Customers would
have to backtrack substantially or do a significant amount of re-work to achieve
the same results outside of ABC's application.
Despite the characterization of the solution as a single Cloud Service, the
solution includes a license to the on-premise software and access to ABC's
hosted application in the cloud. Therefore, ABC determines that it must
evaluate whether the license and the cloud-based SaaS are distinct from
each other.
ABC concludes that the license and the cloud-based SaaS are capable of
being distinct. This is because customers (1) can benefit from the on-premise
software on its own and (2) can benefit from the SaaS together with the on-
premise software license transferred to the customer upfront.
Customers can benefit from the on-premise software on its own despite the
fact that they would generally have to backtrack or undertake re-work to
complete projects started with the on-premise software on its own. Customers
are able to derive economic benefits from use of the on-premise software
because they would not have to re-perform all of the work they had completed
using the offline mode only. For example, even if the customer would have to
re-input and modify data or configurations developed using ABC's on-premise
software into another application to complete the project, ABC's software
would have provided the customer with a platform to try out various models,
processes and/or configurations that would generally provide benefit when
moving forward using another solution.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              242
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Despite concluding that the license and the SaaS are capable of being distinct,
ABC concludes that its promise to grant the on-premise software license and to
provide the cloud-based SaaS are not separately identifiable. ABC concludes
that its solution, the combination of the license and the SaaS, provides
combined functionality that is essential to the customer deriving its intended
benefit from the arrangement. That intended benefit cannot be provided by
either the license and other cloud-based services or software, or other software
and ABC's cloud-based services.
In substance, the on-premise software license and the cloud-based SaaS are
inputs to the combined output (i.e. the solution) that the customer entered into
the contract to obtain, and each element significantly affects the utility of the
other to the customer such that the nature of ABC's overall promise to its
customers is to provide the solution as a whole, not to transfer a license and
provide access to additional cloud-based services.



                  Example C310.3
                  On-premise software with ‘additive’ SaaS
                  functionality
ABC Corp. markets its core software development solution to customers as a
Cloud Service; however, the solution includes both on-premise software subject
to an end-user license agreement and cloud-based services. Neither the license,
nor the cloud-based services, are optional in ABC's contracts and ABC does
not sell the on-premise software separate from the cloud services. The on-
premise software license and the cloud services are co-terminus in all of
ABC's contracts.
The essential functionalities of the solution are in the on-premise software and are
accessible offline or connected to ABC's cloud. The cloud services offer customers
protected data storage and can be accessed by multiple users, in-app information
sharing and real-time collaborative abilities, e.g. the ability for two users in separate
locations to work in the same template simultaneously. However, they do not
change or significantly enhance what a single user can develop using the software
– i.e. a customer working offline would be able to undertake the entire software
development project permitted by ABC's solution – or significantly affect the
workflows to accomplish the customer’s development tasks.
Consistent with Example C310.2, ABC concludes that there are two promised
goods and services in the contract: a license to the on-premise software, and
access to the cloud-based features.
Next, ABC concludes that the license and the cloud-based features are capable
of being distinct. This is because customers can benefit from the on-premise
software on its own and can benefit from the cloud features together with the
on-premise software license transferred to the customer upfront. Customers
can benefit from the on-premise software on its own because they can take a
software development project through the entire project lifecycle using the
software in an offline mode – i.e. without accessing the cloud-based features.
ABC next concludes that its promises to transfer the on-premise software
license and provide access to its cloud-based features are separately



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              243
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




identifiable. ABC decides that the cloud-based features, while valuable and
likely influential to a customer's decision to purchase ABC's solution, are
additive to the on-premise software, rather than transformative. The cloud-
based features provide a collaborative and secure environment for sharing and
storing files and other data and, while those features (and others), may enhance
the productivity of a team working together to complete a project, they do not
change (i.e. modify or customize) the functionality of the on-premise software
or significantly enhance the on-premise software's capabilities, nor do those
features significantly optimize the workflows to complete those projects.
A customer can complete the same software development projects in offline
mode as it could using the software together with the cloud-based features and
in a similar manner (i.e. the customer does not have to undertake significant,
incremental efforts when in offline mode compared with cloud-enabled mode to
complete a development project). Consequently, the software license and the
cloud-based features are not inputs to one overall solution.



                   Example C310.4
                   Flexible hybrid arrangement
ABC Corp. licenses its software (Product Q) on an on-premise (term license)
basis and on a software-as-a-service (SaaS) basis. Some of ABC’s customers
enter into ‘Flex’ arrangements whereby they are permitted a designated
number of concurrent users (e.g. 100 concurrent users), but the mix between
on-premise and SaaS users can vary over time. For example, the customer
would be permitted to have all 100 concurrent users accessing the on-premise
software, all 100 concurrent users accessing the software via the cloud, or any
mix in between. There is also no requirement for a specific employee of one of
these customers to always access the software via the on-premise software or
via the cloud. The Flex arrangements include technical support and the right to
unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements (collectively, PCS). Updates,
upgrades and enhancements are implemented by ABC to the hosted instance
of Product Q immediately on release.
In evaluating the number of performance obligations in its Flex contracts, ABC
considers that:
— the Product Q software is the same software, whether accessed on-
  premise or via the cloud (note: the possible exception would be the period
  of time between when the customer is provided an update or upgrade and
  when they implement that update or upgrade to their on-premise software);
— a customer user is not accessing the on-premise software and cloud-based
  software concurrently; the user is using the on-premise instance of the
  Product Q software or is accessing the hosted instance of the
  software; and
— a user is not accessing the on-premise software and cloud-based software
  concurrently, therefore, there are not ongoing interactions between the two
  or any ‘integrated (or combined)’ features or functionalities.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              244
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




ABC concludes that its Flex contracts include a term license to the Product Q
software that is distinct from a Product Q SaaS element (i.e. the right to access
Product Q via ABC’s cloud).
ABC next considers whether the PCS related to the term license, consistent
with Questions C150 – C170, is a single performance obligation, separate from
the performance obligation to transfer the Product Q license. If ABC concludes
PCS is a single, distinct performance obligation, it would have three
performance obligations in the arrangement – i.e. the term license, SaaS,
and PCS.


Unspecified additional software product rights

                  Question C320
                  Are rights to use unspecified (when-and-if available)
                  additional software products and an initial soft-
                  ware license(s) distinct from each other in a
                  software licensing arrangement?

  Rights to use unspecified additional software products
  As part of a multiple-element arrangement with a user, an entity may agree
  to transfer software licenses currently and to transfer unspecified additional
  software licenses in the future. For example, the entity may agree to transfer
  licenses to all new software products to be introduced in a family of products
  over the next two years.
  A right to receive unspecified additional software licenses is typically
  evidenced by the entity’s agreement to grant the customer rights to use new
  products introduced by the entity within a specified time period without
  regard to the specific features and functionality of the new products.
  These arrangements are similar to arrangements that include rights to
  unspecified upgrades. Nevertheless, they are distinguished from
  arrangements that include unspecified update/upgrade rights because the
  future deliverables are rights to use additional software products, not
  unspecified updates, upgrades or enhancements to existing software
  products to which the customer has rights to use.


Interpretive response: Question C110 discusses when a software license is
considered capable of being distinct. In addition, we expect that, by nature, the
right to unspecified future software licenses would have benefit to the
customer either:
— on its own – e.g. those licensed products may be off-the-shelf applications
  the customer can benefit from immediately upon download; or
— together with readily available resources – e.g. implementation services it
  could obtain relative to those additional products or the initial software
  license(s) provided initially under the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              245
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




We believe the analysis of whether promises to transfer a software license and
to provide unspecified future software licenses when-and-if additional software
products are developed are separately identifiable will be similar to that for a
software license and unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights (see
Question C170). Similarly, we believe that in most contracts, the promise to
transfer the software license and the promise to provide unspecified future
software licenses will be separately identifiable from each other. This is
because:
— The promise to later (i.e. subsequent to transfer of the initial software
  license) transfer a license to any future software products produced means
  that the entity is not providing a significant integration service to transfer a
  single, combined output that uses the initial license and subsequently
  developed software products as inputs. These arrangements are not
  analogous to the multiple license scenario described in Question C120.
— The initial license and additional, unspecified licenses that may be
  transferred in the future are not inputs to a combined output – i.e. inputs to
  a combined software system or solution. This means that generally the
  entity can fulfill its promise to transfer the initial software license separately
  from fulfilling its promise to transfer future unspecified licenses. Typically,
  the entity will fulfill its promise to transfer any initially promised software
  licenses before any future additional software products are even developed
  and will likely sell licenses to the future software products to new or
  existing customers that have not licensed the software promised initially in
  the contract; this evidences that the entity can transfer the promised and
  the future licenses independently. Consequently, the license and the
  unspecified future software product rights are not highly interrelated or
  interdependent.
— By definition, an additional software product does not modify or customize
  the initially licensed software because it is a new product; a release that
  modifies or customizes existing software would be characterized as an
  upgrade or an enhancement.
However, in more limited circumstances, the promise to transfer a software
license may not be separately identifiable from the promise to provide
unspecified future software licenses when-and-if additional software products
are developed. We believe that the fundamental question to be asked in
determining whether those two promises are separately identifiable is whether:
— the future software licenses will be ‘additive’ to the initial software license
  – i.e. those future software licenses will provide additional
  functionality/utility to the customer; or instead
— will effectively ‘replace’ the software license(s) initially provided – i.e. the
  customer will stop using the initially licensed software (e.g. because it is
  made obsolete by the new software products) in favor of the new software.
In the former, ‘additive’ case, we believe the two promises are separately
identifiable; the unspecified future software licenses right does not significantly
affect the utility of the initial software license(s) to the customer.
In contrast, a customer may enter into a license, for which it is expected that
the initially licensed software will need to be, in effect, replaced by one or more
new software products in order to continue to provide the customer with




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              246
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




substantive utility; this would suggest that the nature of the entity’s overall
promise to the customer is, fundamentally, to provide ongoing access to the
entity’s software developments throughout the license period. The initial
software license(s) and the unspecified future software license right are inputs
to that overall, combined promise.
In these cases:
— the utility of the initially licensed software degrades significantly during the
  license period (and not predominantly at or near the end of that period only);
— customers’ use of the initially licensed software ceases or substantially
  changes in character – e.g. from use in commercial production to use solely
  in supporting prior production – within a reasonably short period of time
  from the release of new software products; and
— updates, upgrades and new software products to which customers obtain
  rights are downloaded and used by the customers. For example, customers
  timely downloading and/or installing the software or, if the contracts include
  remix rights into future software products, demonstrating that customers
  regularly remix their existing licenses into newly-released software products.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

If an arrangement included unspecified additional software products, legacy
US GAAP specified that the entire arrangement be accounted for as a
subscription even if the vendor did not intend to develop any new products
during the term of the arrangement. Under subscription accounting, no
allocation of revenue was made among any of the software products, and all
software-related revenue (including PCS) from the arrangement was recognized
ratably over the term of the arrangement beginning with delivery of the first
product. If the term of the arrangement was not stated, revenue was
recognized ratably over the estimated economic life of the products covered by
the arrangement, beginning with delivery of the first product.
In subscription arrangements that included professional services, entities
separated the subscription element (i.e. the combined element of the upfront
software product and the rights to unspecified future additional software
products) from the services element based on vendor-specific evidence of fair
value (VSOE). Revenue allocable to the subscription element was recognized
ratably over the subscription period (or the economic life of the software if no
term was specified), and revenue allocable to the services was recognized as
they were performed. If the vendor did not have VSOE over the subscription
element, which was typically the case, the entire arrangement fee was required
to be recognized ratably over the longer of the term of the subscription (or the
economic life of the software if no term was specified) or the period over
which the services were to be provided, beginning with delivery of the first
software product.
If a subscription element existed in an arrangement that would have been
accounted for under contract accounting, it was not considered separable from
the contract accounting element. Therefore, vendors recognized revenue equal



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              247
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




to the lesser of (1) the amount resulting from the application of contract
accounting or (2) the amount resulting from the application of subscription
accounting (ratable). Due to the nature of unspecified additional software
products, vendors generally could not reasonably estimate progress toward
completion and the range of costs under the arrangement. Therefore, vendors
measured the amount of revenue resulting from the application of contract
accounting either under the completed contract method or, if some level of
profitability was reasonably assured, a zero gross margin percentage-of-
completion approach.
In most cases, rights to unspecified additional software products will be distinct
from a software license or from a combined software license and professional
services performance obligation – e.g. software license and customization
services. Therefore, under Topic 606, there will likely be a significant change in
accounting for many entities that include unspecified additional software
product rights in their contracts.
Entities will, in those cases, recognize revenue for the:
— software license at the point in time that it is transferred to the customer;
  or for a combined software license/services performance obligation, over
  the period that the services are performed; and
— unspecified additional software product rights, in most cases ratably over
  the period that those rights exist. The same considerations as outlined in
  Question C130 for unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights will
  generally apply to unspecified additional software product rights when
  determining whether those rights are a stand-ready obligation, and in
  determining the appropriate measure of progress to apply when
  recognizing revenue.
Questions F230 and F270 address accounting for combined performance
obligations that include a right to unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements or unspecified additional software product rights.



                  Example C320.1
                  Contract with rights to unspecified additional
                  software products
ABC Corp. is a vendor of financial accounting software. ABC enters into a
contract with Customer to license its revenue accounting software, which is
currently available. In addition, ABC agrees to grant Customer a license to any
related software introduced over the next three years that is designed to work
specifically with the revenue accounting software (e.g. customer relationship
management or billing software). ABC considers any new software developed
that would be subject to this provision to be additional software products,
rather than upgrades or enhancements, because such software would be
marketed and licensed as stand-alone products that do not need to be used
with the revenue accounting software.
The revenue accounting software is, and any future software products ABC
develops will be, off-the-shelf software that is fully functional upon basic




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              248
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




installation. Customer can do the installation itself or engage any number of
alternative providers.
ABC first determines that there are two promised goods or services in the
contract:
— the software license for the revenue accounting software; and
— the right to use unspecified additional software products (when-and-if
  developed).
ABC next concludes that the revenue accounting software license and the right
to use unspecified future software products are each capable of being distinct.
Customer can benefit from the initial revenue accounting software license and
any future licenses to additional software products on their own (or together
with basic installation services that are readily available). This is because the
revenue accounting software is, and any future software products are expected
to be, fully functional after only basic installation.
Lastly, ABC concludes that its promises to transfer the revenue accounting
software license and to transfer a license to any future software products are
separately identifiable. This is because, even if complementary, the new software
products will not change the functionality of the revenue accounting software.
Similarly, the revenue accounting software will not change the functionality of the
additional software, which will be marketed (and is expected to be licensed)
separately from the revenue accounting software.
Consequently:
— neither the initial software license, nor the right to use future software
  products, is significantly modifying or customizing the other;
— the initial software license and the right to use future software products are
  not inputs to a combined software system or solution; and
— because the revenue accounting software is licensed on its own and the
  future software products are similarly expected to be licensed on their own,
  they are not highly interrelated or interdependent.
Based on the above, the revenue accounting software license and the right to
use unspecified future software products are distinct from each other, and
therefore separate performance obligations.



                  Example C320.2
                  Non-distinct unspecified update/upgrade and
                  additional software product rights
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to license its current commercial
software applications for three years. ABC also promises to provide Customer
with all updates, upgrades and enhancements it develops for that software, as
well as to provide Customer with a license to any new software it develops
during the license period within the same family of software products.
ABC develops software used by customers in a rapidly changing field – the
parameters of the field itself have been changing for some time and are




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              249
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




expected to continue to change for the foreseeable future. Therefore, ABC’s
software must also change rapidly in order for ABC’s customers to use ABC’s
software within this field of development. ABC’s customers expect regular and
timely updates, upgrades and new products that keep pace with the changes in
their field because such updates are necessary for them to continue to derive
benefit from the software. ABC’s software would not be expected to remain
useful, in any substantive respect, to its customers throughout its typical
three-year (and sometimes five-year) license periods. Consequently, ABC’s
customers never purchase ABC’s software licenses without unspecified
update/upgrade/enhancement and unspecified future software product rights,
while ABC invests heavily in R&D and regularly releases either updates (or
upgrades) to its existing software products or new software products (that, in
effect, take the place of older software products) to address new areas of
research within the field of its customers.
The necessity of ABC’s updates and new software products to its customers,
as well as the pending obsolescence of older versions and software products at
the time new versions and products are released, is evidenced by the fact that
those customers:
— almost universally download nearly all (1) updates and upgrades to existing
  software products and (2) new software products within a short period of
  time; and
— remix all or a substantial portion of their licenses from older products to
  new software products immediately or shortly after ABC releases them.
ABC determines that there are three promised goods and services in this
contract: the licenses to ABC’s existing software products (which are
transferred to the customer at contract inception) for three years, rights to any
updates/upgrades of the existing software developed during the three-year
contract term and rights to use additional software products developed by ABC
during the three-year contract term.
ABC concludes that all three promised items are capable of being distinct. Each
provides benefit to ABC either:
— on its own – e.g. customers can derive economic benefits from the initial
  software licenses and software licenses granted during the contract term
  on a when-and-if available basis; or
— together with other readily available resources – e.g. the right to when-and-
  if available updates/upgrades of the existing software provide benefit to
  Customer together with the initial software licenses transferred at contract
  inception.
However, ABC concludes that its promises to transfer the initial software
licenses, provide unspecified updates/upgrades/enhancements and provide
unspecified additional software product rights are not separately identifiable.
The three individual promises are inputs to a combined overall promise to
Customer in the contract.
In reaching this conclusion, ABC considers that its initial software licenses,
without substantive updates/upgrades, would not provide significant benefit to
Customer throughout the license period. Absent timely updates/upgrades (or
new, replacement software products) Customer would likely stop using ABC’s




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              250
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




software and develop/acquire an alternative solution well before the end of the
license period. Consequently, Customer would be highly unlikely to enter into a
three-year license arrangement with ABC absent the promise of timely
updates/upgrades and/or replacement software products to keep pace with
rapid developments in its field. As outlined above, the significant decline in
utility of the initially licensed software, as well as the need for the
updates/upgrades and additional software products, is evidenced by the fact
that ABC’s customers:
— almost universally download nearly all of the updates/upgrades (or new
  software products) provided immediately (or shortly after they are
  released); and
— exercise their remix rights to remix into the new software products (or
  upgraded versions of existing products) to which they obtain rights
  immediately (or shortly after) ABC provides them and out of older versions
  or older products once updates/upgrades or replacement products are
  provided.
Therefore, ABC concludes that the initial licenses, the unspecified
update/upgrade/enhancement rights and the unspecified future software
product rights are a single performance obligation. This is despite the fact that
(1) ABC would generally be able to fulfill each of the three promises
independently and (2) ABC is not providing a significant service of integrating
the initial licenses, the unspecified updates/upgrades/enhancements
and the unspecified future software licenses into a single, integrated ‘solution’
or ‘system’. The nature of ABC’s combined performance obligation in this
arrangement is to provide Customer with ongoing access to its evolving
software in Customer’s field for the three-year term of the contract.



                  Question C330
                  Are the considerations as to whether promised
                  SaaS and a right to access unspecified additional
                  software products as a service distinct from each
                  other different from those in a software licensing
                  arrangement?
Interpretive response: In general, no. We believe the considerations would be
substantially the same as those outlined in Question C320.
However, the promise to provide access to future hosted software products
may be co-terminus with the promised SaaS, and the two promises may have
the same pattern of transfer to the customer – e.g. if the entity concludes that
both promises are satisfied over time and that a time-based measure of
progress toward satisfaction of each promise is appropriate. In that case, the
entity is permitted to account for the SaaS and the right to access future hosted
software products as a single performance obligation, regardless of whether
the two items are distinct.
Question C130 provides considerations about whether a right to unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancements is a stand-ready obligation; and, if it is,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              251
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




determining the measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of that
obligation. We believe the considerations for a right to access future hosted
software products are substantially the same as those outlined in that question.


Specified upgrades and rights to use additional
software products

                  Question C340
                  Are specified upgrades and rights to specified
                  additional software products additional promised
                  goods in a contract with a customer? If so, are they
                  distinct from the other goods or services in the
                  contract?

  Specified upgrades
  A specified upgrade right is generally an entity’s explicit commitment to
  deliver, or agreement to deliver on a when-and-if available basis, a specific
  version of the software or an upgrade with specific features and functionality.
  Any discussion in the contract with the customer of possible features and
  functionality of future versions of the software would generally represent a
  specified upgrade right.
  An entity may implicitly grant its customer a specified upgrade right, without
  there being explicit discussion in the contract. This is the case when the
  entity provides assurance to the customer that a future product release will
  contain specific features and/or functionality. This might occur, for example,
  through communication of a detailed software product roadmap (i.e.
  marketing materials) or in a non-contractual response to a customer’s request
  for proposal.
  As a practical matter, claims made in marketing materials available to
  customers and commitments by sales personnel may be considered by the
  customer to be part of the arrangement, and therefore represent a specified
  upgrade right. The specific facts and circumstances should be evaluated on a
  case-by-case basis, and the entity may need to consult with its financial and
  legal advisers to determine if a specified upgrade right has been granted
  implicitly to a customer.

  Factors to consider when evaluating whether an implicit specified upgrade
  right has been granted to a customer include the following:
  — Upgrade/enhancement detail – the level of detail of the features,
    functionality and general release timeframe of the future product that has
    been provided to the customer. The greater the level of detail and the
    closer the release date of the enhancement to the initial contract, the
    greater the likelihood that the entity has created an expectation by the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              252
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




        customer of the release of the future identifiable upgrade/enhancement
        that may have affected the customer’s purchase decision.
  — Caveat language – whether the entity’s use of caveat language detailing
    the product roadmap and future development efforts in a license
    arrangement gives rise to uncertainty about whether the customer will
    receive the product upgrades/enhancements. The greater the level of
    uncertainty about the future delivery of an upgrade/enhancement, the
    less likely that the entity has created an expectation by the customer of
    the release of the future identifiable upgrade/enhancement.
  — Customer communication – whether the entity communicates the
    features, functionality and timeframe for general release of the future
    product, or communicates a release to only certain identifiable
    customers. The broader the intended distribution of the product and the
    more specific the communication is about functionality and features of
    the program, the greater the likelihood that customers would expect to
    receive the specified product upgrades/enhancements.
  — Entity’s history – an entity’s history of charging a substantive amount
    for product upgrades/enhancements would indicate that the product may
    not be a specified upgrade.
  — Customer request – whether the customer requests or requires a
    roadmap to specify specific features and/or functionality that are not
    available currently in the marketed product. Such a request or
    requirement would indicate that the product roadmap may be a specified
    upgrade.
  Specified additional software products
  As part of a multiple-element arrangement, an entity may agree to deliver
  software currently and deliver specified additional software products in the
  future. The rights to these additional products may be included either in the
  terms of a PCS contract or in a separate agreement, or may be implied in
  much the same manner as specified upgrade rights.
  In determining if a specified software deliverable is an upgrade/enhancement
  or a product, a vendor should consider carefully the specific facts and
  circumstances on a case-by-case basis. Factors to consider include the
  following:
  — The significance of the differences in the features and functionality
    of the new deliverable from the vendor’s existing products. If the
    new deliverable has significant differences in the features and
    functionality from the vendor’s existing products, or if the new
    deliverable performs functions outside the domain of the vendor’s
    existing products, it may indicate that the deliverable is a product rather
    than an upgrade/enhancement.
  — Replacement of existing products. If the new deliverable is intended to
    substantially replace the vendor’s existing products, it may indicate that
    the deliverable is an upgrade/enhancement rather than a product.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              253
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




  — The extent of development activities. If the new deliverable required a
    significant development effort, it may indicate that the deliverable is a
    product rather than an upgrade/enhancement.
  — The relationship of the price of the new deliverable to the pricing for
    the vendor’s existing products, including price discounts to existing
    customers. If the new deliverable is priced (or expected to be priced) at
    an amount that is significantly higher than the price of the entity’s
    existing products, or if the existing users of the vendor’s products are
    offered no discount or only an insignificant discount for the purchase of
    the new deliverable, it may indicate that the deliverable is a product
    rather than an upgrade/enhancement.
  — The manner in which the new deliverable is marketed. If the new
    deliverable is marketed as a different product, it may indicate that the
    new deliverable is a product rather than an upgrade/enhancement.
  — Product name. If the new deliverable has a different name than the
    entity’s existing products it may indicate that the deliverable is a product
    rather than an upgrade/enhancement.

Interpretive response: A promise to grant a customer the right to use specific
IP (e.g. an upgraded version of software, a new functionality or a new software
product) is a promised good under Topic 606. Both specified upgrade rights and
rights to specified additional software products, whether explicit in the contract
or implicit through another form of commitment or customary business
practice, represent promises to deliver a specified good to the customer.
The considerations with respect to whether specified upgrades or
enhancements or additional software products are distinct from other goods or
services in a contract are not different from those that apply to other promised
goods and services. However, we typically expect rights to use software that
will be transferred in the future to be distinct from goods or services that are:
— transferred upfront – e.g. a software license transferred upfront; or
— begin to be provided at the beginning of the contract – e.g. PCS related to a
  transferred software license or professional services to implement that
  licensed software.
This is because something that will come only later will typically not be an input
to a combined item together with a software license to (e.g. an earlier version
or a different software product) that is transferred first or services that pertain
to the software license that is transferred first.
Further, the initial license can be transferred and services related to that license
provided before the specified version, enhancement or additional software
product is available for release; and the specified version, enhancement or
additional software product can be transferred to the customer (or new
customers) independently at a later date. This indicates that those items are not
highly interrelated or interdependent. However, all relevant facts and
circumstances will need to be considered.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              254
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, because vendor-specific objective evidence of fair
value (VSOE) rarely, if ever, existed for specified upgrades, enhancements or
additional software products, the inclusion of one of those items in
arrangement generally resulted in the deferral of all consideration in the
arrangement until the specified item was delivered to the customer. When a
specified upgrade, enhancement or additional software product was promised
to the customer that was not yet developed, this meant that the software
entity might recognize no revenue under the arrangement for a significant
period of time. This was the case even if all of the other elements of the
contract were delivered – e.g. software and professional services.
The accounting effect of promising specified upgrades, enhancements or
additional software products is significantly less onerous under Topic 606
because of the elimination of the VSOE separability requirement. In most cases,
because the specified item will be distinct from the other promised goods or
services in the contract, the promise to transfer the specified item will not
result in the deferral of all contract consideration. Instead, only the portion of
the contract consideration allocated to that promised good or service will be
deferred until the specified item is transferred to the customer.



                  Example C340.1
                  Implicit specified upgrade
ABC Corp. receives a request for proposal (RFP) from Customer that indicates
that Customer desires incremental XYZ functionality in the general ledger
software it plans to purchase. In a written response to Customer’s RFP, ABC
states that although XYZ functionality currently is not available in Version 4.0 of
Product A (ABC’s currently available general ledger software), ABC anticipates
that XYZ functionality will be available in Version 4.1 of Product A, which is
expected to be released in approximately six months.
Subsequent to the RFP process, ABC enters into a contract with Customer to
transfer a license to Version 4.0 of Product A and to provide Customer with a
right to any future updates, upgrades and enhancements to Product A, when-
and-if available, for a period of one year. The arrangement does not explicitly
discuss the XYZ functionality.
ABC determines that there are three promised goods and services in this
contract: the software license for the general ledger software (Version 4.0), the
right to unspecified updates/upgrades/enhancements and the specified upgrade
right to XYZ functionality.
ABC has implicitly promised to provide XYZ functionality to Customer through
its communication in the RFP. This created a reasonable expectation on
Customer’s part that ABC will deliver the functionality through a future update.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              255
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




ABC concludes that the general ledger software license and the right to
unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements are distinct from each other
(see Question C170 and Examples C170.1 and C320.1).
ABC also concludes that the specified upgrade right to XYZ functionality is
distinct:
— Customer will be able to benefit from the XYZ functionality together with
  the Product A software specifically licensed in the contract – i.e. the XYZ
  specified upgrade is capable of being distinct; and
— ABC’s promise to transfer the XYZ functionality is separately identifiable
  from the other promises in the contract (i.e. to transfer a license to
  Version 4.0 and future unspecified updates/upgrades/enhancements). This
  is because the XYZ functionality will not significantly modify or customize
  the Version 4.0 software; rather it will provide an incremental functionality.
  Consequently, the XYZ functionality is not an input, together with the
  Product A software or the unspecified updates/upgrades/enhancements, to
  a combined output in this contract. Lastly, ABC is able to transfer a license
  to the Version 4.0 software independently of transferring any future XYZ
  upgrade, and similarly would be able to transfer a license to a later version
  of the software independently – e.g. to a new customer that enters into a
  contract to license the software once XYZ functionality is part of the
  commercial release version of the software. Therefore, the initial
  Version 4.0 license and the XYZ upgrade are not highly interrelated or
  interdependent.
Based on the above, ABC concludes that the initial, Version 4.0 software
license, the unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights and the XYZ
specified upgrade are each distinct, and therefore each separate performance
obligations.



                  Question C350
                  If a SaaS provider makes a promise to a customer
                  to add functionalities or features to its SaaS, is that
                  an additional promised service in the contract with
                  the customer? If so, is that promised service distinct
                  from the original SaaS service?
Interpretive response: SaaS providers frequently either provide customers
with an explicit promise that its SaaS will include new or changed features or
functionality or provide customers with marketing or similar information that
describes expected future updates, upgrades or enhancements to its hosted
software.
In contrast to specified upgrades in a software licensing arrangement, because
the customer is already accessing the entity’s hosted software, the entity does
not have to deliver any additional software (e.g. a new version) to the customer
to satisfy the explicit or implicit upgrade promise. This has given rise to a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              256
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




question as to whether a promised update, upgrade or enhancement in a SaaS
arrangement is:
— an additional promised service to the customer (i.e. an additional SaaS
  element) that is satisfied by the SaaS provider when the
  update/upgrade/enhancement ‘goes live’; or
— merely part of the overall promise to provide SaaS; and therefore, not an
  additional promised good or service in the contract with the SaaS customer.
Those that assert the latter point of view state that the nature of a SaaS
arrangement (at least in a multi-tenant architecture) is the customer having
access to whatever version of the software the entity hosts in its multi-tenant
environment. The fact that the entity communicated to a customer its intent to
add features and/or functionality to its hosted software does not constitute a
promise to any specific customer.
Identifying additional promises to the customer
We believe the specific facts and circumstances will affect the determination
of whether communication of planned feature or functionality enhancements in
a SaaS environment results in an additional promised service – i.e. a promise
to provide access to those new features and/or functionalities in addition to
the SaaS provider’s promise of providing access to its core SaaS offering.
Any one of the following three indicators would typically suggest the
communication of planned feature or functionality enhancements reflects a
promise to the customer:
— The SaaS provider intends to sell the new features or functionalities on a
  stand-alone basis
      If the SaaS provider intends to sell the new features or functionalities on a
      stand-alone basis, it generally suggests that the provision of access to
      those items to the customer is an additional promised service in the
      contract. For example, a promise to transfer a new module that the SaaS
      provider intends to sell to other customers independently or bundled with
      an entirely different suite of products from that to which the customer has
      access before introduction of the new module would generally be a
      promise to provide additional SaaS to the customer in the future – i.e. in
      addition to the SaaS to which the entity initially promises to provide.
— The added features or functionalities provide new, discrete capabilities (i.e.
  the ability to perform tasks or functions independent of the original features
  or functionalities) with independent value to the customer
      A SaaS provider may only intend to provide access to a new module or new
      application as part of a suite. The fact that the SaaS provider does not
      intend to sell access to the new module/application on a stand-alone basis
      does not mean promised access to that new module/application (when
      available) is not a promise to the customer. Regardless of whether the SaaS
      provider intends to sell the new features or functionalities on a stand-alone
      basis, if the new features or functionalities provide discrete capabilities that
      have independent value to the customer – i.e. independent from the
      existing functionalities to which the customer has access – it generally
      suggests that the provision of access to those new features or
      functionalities is an additional promised service in the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              257
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




— The customer is accessing the SaaS in a single-tenant architecture
      A promise to add features or functionalities, whether explicitly or implicitly,
      to a hosted software application in a single-tenant architecture would
      generally be viewed in the same manner as a promise to provide a
      specified software upgrade in a software licensing arrangement – i.e. the
      promise to add the specified features or functionality is an additional
      promise specific to that customer to provide the customer with access to
      those added features or functionality.
If none of these indicators is present, then we believe the communication of
planned feature or functionality enhancements in a SaaS environment would
not normally be additional promises to the customer.
Evaluating whether additional promises are distinct
Broadly consistent with the evaluation in Question C340 relative to specified
upgrades in a software licensing arrangement, we would typically expect
additional SaaS functionalities that represent promises to the customer (see
above) to be distinct.
Given the underlying principle of the distinct evaluation – which is to evaluate
whether two or more promised items are, in effect, inputs to a single combined
item – an additional feature/functionality that will be made available to the
customer substantially after ‘go-live’ will typically not be an input to a combined
item. [ASU 2016-10.BC29]
Further, the distinct evaluation considers the level of integration, interrelation or
interdependence among promised items to the customer (in this case, the SaaS
offering and the additional feature or functionality). Therefore, even if the
additional feature or functionality depends on the hosted application to which
the customer already has access (in the same manner additional software code
in a specified update or upgrade likely just adds to existing software code to
which the customer already has rights of use), the customer’s ability to make
substantial use of the SaaS offering before implementation of the additional
feature or functionality, and the entity’s ability to fulfill its promise to provide the
SaaS offering before developing the additional feature/functionality, supports
that the two items are not highly interrelated or highly interdependent. [ASU 2016-
10.BC32]




                  Example C350.1
                  Additional SaaS features/functionalities not
                  accounted for as an additional promise to the
                  customer
ABC Corp. is a SaaS provider of tax preparation software – i.e. ABC provides
software-as-a-service, and does not license its software. ABC’s customers
access ABC’s tax preparation software in a multi-tenant environment. ABC
enters into a three-year SaaS arrangement with Customer.
Scenario 1: No additional promise to the customer
In response to an inquiry from Customer during the contract negotiation
process, ABC provides Customer with a product development plan



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              258
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




demonstrating that by the end of Year 1 of the arrangement, ABC’s software
will incorporate the necessary fields and calculations to address new
government regulations that come into effect during Year 2 of the
ABC/Customer SaaS arrangement.
The new features will not provide any discrete functionality to users of the tax
software; the new fields and calculations are an integrated part of the software
being able to perform its core function – the production of complete and
accurate tax returns. The new features were planned for introduction into
ABC’s tax software before, and independent of, the negotiation with ABC
because the new regulations will affect all of ABC’s tax software customers.
ABC observes that the updated features do not provide a discrete or
independent functionality to any customer. Rather, these feature
enhancements are necessary to keep ABC’s tax preparation software
current and relevant for all of its existing and future customers. Without the
updates, ABC’s software could not produce complete and accurate tax
returns, which is its core function. Therefore, the updates are more about
maintaining the utility of the software than enhancing the software.
As a result, ABC concludes that provision of its product development plan does
not result in an additional promise to Customer to provide the features and
functionalities described. This is even though the expected updates were
expressly communicated to the customer in response to a direct inquiry during
the contract negotiation process; and were likely something that if ABC was not
committed to providing would have adversely affected ABC’s chances of
winning the contract.
Scenario 2: Additional promise to the customer
In response to an inquiry from Customer during the contract negotiation
process, ABC provides Customer with its current product development plan,
which includes introducing a new module for producing and filing UK tax returns
by the end of Year 1 of the arrangement.
The new module will permit entities to produce and file UK tax returns
regardless of whether they first produce the tax returns that ABC’s software is
already designed to produce – e.g. US federal and state returns. ABC has not
yet decided whether it will sell this module independently.
ABC observes that the new UK tax return preparation module will provide a
new, significant and independent functionality to its customers that does not
currently exist; and that, if ABC chooses to do so, could be sold independently
to UK tax filers. This, combined with the fact that the expectation of deploying a
new UK module was communicated to the customer in response to a direct
inquiry during the contract negotiation process, leads ABC to conclude that
providing access to the UK module constitutes an additional promised service.
Because the UK module functions independently from the existing modules
(which have functioned without a UK module for many years), ABC concludes
that access to the existing software and access to the UK module are distinct
from each other, and therefore separate performance obligations.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              259
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Other software-specific elements

                  Question C360
                  Should a platform transfer right be accounted for as
                  an additional promise to the customer or as a right
                  to exchange software licenses?

  Platform transfers
  A software arrangement may provide the customer with the right to transfer
  software from one hardware platform or operating system to different
  hardware platforms or operating systems. Platform transfer rights may be
  relative to a specified or an unspecified platform.


Interpretive response: If a software contract permits the customer, either
explicitly or implicitly (e.g. by customary business practice), to continue using
the original platform software in addition to the new platform software, the
platform transfer right is accounted for as a promise to transfer an additional
software license – to an additional software product. This is because the
customer will be entitled to use two software products rather than one.
However, a platform transfer right that does not permit the customer to
continue to use the original platform software is accounted for as a like-kind
exchange if the right:
— is for a software product with no more than minimal differences; and
— does not increase the number of copies or concurrent users of the software
  product available under the license.
Question C80 addresses factors to consider in evaluating whether software
products contain more than minimal differences.
If the contract does not permit the customer to continue to use the original
platform software in addition to the new platform software – but is for a
software product with more than minimal differences from the original licensed
platform software – the platform transfer right should be accounted for in
accordance with the right of return guidance in Topic 606. The entity treats the
exercise of the platform transfer right as a return of the original platform
software and a purchase of the new platform software, but not as an additional
promised license in the contract.
If the platform transfer right is granted to a reseller of the entity’s products, the
same considerations generally apply. Therefore, that right is treated either as a
return right, as a right to an additional specified or unspecified software product,
or as a consignment.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              260
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

If a software arrangement contractually permitted the customer to continue
using the original platform software in addition to the new platform software,
the platform transfer right was accounted for as an additional software product
because the customer was entitled to two products rather than one.
The resulting accounting differed depending on whether the additional software
product was specified or unspecified.
— If specified, because entities only rarely had VSOE over their software
  licenses, the entity deferred all revenue under the arrangement until the
  additional software was delivered.
— If unspecified, if the platform transfer right did not qualify for exchange
  accounting, the entire arrangement (including the unspecified platform
  transfer right) was accounted for as a subscription. The accounting under
  legacy US GAAP is described in Question C320 for arrangements that
  included rights to unspecified additional software products.
However, a platform transfer right that did not permit the customer to continue
to use the original platform software was accounted for as a like-kind exchange
if the right:
— was for the same software product; and
— did not increase the number of copies or concurrent users of the software
  product available under the license.
Products were considered to be the same product if there were no more than
minimal differences among them in price, features and functions, and the
products were marketed as the same product. If the platform transfer right
did not qualify for like-kind exchange accounting, the right was accounted for as
a return.
Platform transfer rights granted to resellers, rather than end customers, were
accounted for as returns.
In general, the evaluation of whether a platform transfer right is accounted for
as an additional promise to the customer, as a like-kind exchange right, or as a
return right is consistent between Topic 606 and legacy US GAAP. However, if
a platform transfer right is accounted for as an additional promise to the
customer (specified or unspecified), it will typically be distinct from the other
promised goods and services in the contract. Therefore, unlike under legacy
US GAAP, it will not result in either deferral of all contract revenue until the
specified additional software license is transferred, or recognizing revenue for
the entire arrangement as a subscription (if the additional software license right
is unspecified).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              261
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Example C360.1
                  Platform transfer rights
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer a license to
Software Product X on Platform A (X on A software) and grants Customer the
right to exchange the X on A software for Software Product X on Platform B (X
on B software) when-and-if available.
Scenario 1: Customer may continue to use original software
Customer may continue to use the X on A software if the platform transfer right
is exercised. The X on B software has no more than minimal differences in
price, features and functions from the X on A software and the two products
are marketed as the same product. There are no other promises to Customer in
the contract.
Because Customer is entitled to continue to use the X on A software in addition
to the X on B software, the X on B software is accounted for as an additional
promised software license.
ABC then concludes that the X on B software is distinct from the X on
A software. ABC regularly sells licenses to the X on A software without also
promising to transfer a license to the X on B software, and vice versa. In
addition, the two software applications do not create a combined functionality in
this contract, nor do they modify or customize one another. Consequently, ABC
concludes that the two applications are each capable of being distinct – i.e.
customers can benefit from each software product on its own or together with
other readily available resources – and that the promises to transfer each
license are separately identifiable.
Scenario 2: Customer may not continue to use original software
Unlike Scenario 1, Customer is not contractually entitled to continue to use the
X on A software if it exercises the platform transfer right;
The X on B software has no more than minimal differences in price, features or
functionality from the X on A software, and it is assumed that the platform
transfer does not grant incremental user rights to Customer. Therefore, the
platform transfer right is not an additional promised good or service in the
contract. Instead, it is accounted for as a like-kind exchange right, which
requires no additional accounting by ABC.



                  Example C360.2
                  Unspecified platform transfer rights
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer a license to
Software Product X on Platform A (X on A software) and grants Customer the
right to exchange the X on A software for a license to Software Product X on a
different operating system. The right does not expire. The different operating
system is not specified in the arrangement. Customer would not retain rights to
use the X on A software.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              262
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




There are two promises in this contract: the promise to transfer a license to the
X on A software, and an unspecified platform transfer right that does not expire.
The platform transfer right is unspecified. However, the open-ended nature of
that right means that there is a high likelihood that the product to which
Customer would receive a license upon exercise would have more than minimal
differences from the X on A software with respect to features, functionality and
price. Therefore, the platform transfer right is not an exchange right.
ABC concludes that the X on A software license and the unspecified platform
transfer right are distinct from each other, and therefore separate performance
obligations. ABC’s evaluation of whether the unspecified platform transfer right
is distinct is consistent with the analysis in Example C320.1.



                  Question C370
                  Is a sunset clause included in a contract with a
                  customer a promised good or service? If so, is it
                  distinct?

  Sunset clauses
  Under the provisions of a sunset clause, a customer is entitled to replace a
  software product – if the entity discontinues support of the licensed product
  and has migrated to a new product – provided the customer was current on
  its right to receive unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements. Such a
  clause is also referred to as an end-of-life clause.


Interpretive response: Under Topic 606, exchange rights that allow customers
to exchange one product for another of the same type, quality, condition and
price are not additional promised goods or services in a contract. Therefore, if
the sunset clause entitles the customer only to a replacement software product
that has no more than minimal differences in price, features and functionality as
compared to the licensed product, we expect that a sunset clause will not be
considered an additional promise in the contract.
However, if the replacement product is expected to have more than minimal
differences in price, features or functionality when the clause is triggered (or
these factors are unknown), the entity needs to consider whether the right is,
in-substance:
— a contingent return right (i.e. right of return that is contingent upon the end-
  of-life of the existing product); or
— a specified when-and-if available upgrade right.
All facts and circumstances need to be considered when determining the
accounting for such provisions. Entities that include sunset clauses in their
contracts should consider including language specifying that replacement
products will have no more than minimal differences in price, features
and functionality.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              263
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The legacy US GAAP accounting guidance with respect to what constituted an
exchange, and how to account for an exchange, is essentially the same as that
in Topic 606.
If the sunset clause is deemed to provide a specified upgrade right, the
accounting effect of that conclusion under Topic 606 differs substantially from
the accounting effect of that conclusion under legacy US GAAP (see
Question C340).



Customer options

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Customer Options for Additional Goods or Services
55-41 Customer options to acquire additional goods or services for free or at a
discount come in many forms, including sales incentives, customer award
credits (or points), contract renewal options, or other discounts on future goods
or services.
55-42 If, in a contract, an entity grants a customer the option to acquire
additional goods or services, that option gives rise to a performance
obligation in the contract only if the option provides a material right to the
customer that it would not receive without entering into that contract (for
example, a discount that is incremental to the range of discounts typically
given for those goods or services to that class of customer in that geographical
area or market). If the option provides a material right to the customer, the
customer in effect pays the entity in advance for future goods or services, and
the entity recognizes revenue when those future goods or services are
transferred or when the option expires.
55-43 If a customer has the option to acquire an additional good or service at a
price that would reflect the standalone selling price for that good or service,
that option does not provide the customer with a material right even if the
option can be exercised only by entering into a previous contract. In those
cases, the entity has made a marketing offer that it should account for in
accordance with the guidance in this Topic only when the customer exercises
the option to purchase the additional goods or services.


Topic 606 states that an option for additional goods or services (such as a
renewal option) constitutes a separate performance obligation if the option
gives the customer a material right that it would not receive without entering
into that contract – i.e. the customer effectively pays the entity in advance for
the right to acquire future goods or services.
Questions C380 – C490 address what constitutes a customer option, and
whether a customer option is a performance obligation because it provides the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              264
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




customer with a material right. Other matters with respect to accounting for
customer options that are determined to provide the customer with a material
right – e.g. the allocation of consideration to material rights, and accounting for
the exercise of a material right – are addressed in Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate
the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; Material
rights in this handbook.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The evaluation of whether a discount offered on future purchases provides a
customer with a material right is similar to (but not the same as) legacy US
GAAP and could lead to different units of accounting than under legacy
US GAAP. Under legacy US GAAP, an offer of a discount on future purchases
of goods or services was generally separately accounted for if it was significant
and incremental to both:
— the range of discounts typically given in comparable transactions; and
— the range of discounts reflected in the pricing of other elements in that
  contract.
In assessing whether an option gives the customer a material right under
Topic 606, the discount on future purchases of goods or services is considered
to be a separate performance obligation if that discount is incremental to the
range of discounts typically given for those goods or services to that class of
customer in that geographical area or market. The discount offered does not
need to be incremental to the discount given for other goods or services in the
contract to be a material right, which is different from the requirements in
legacy US GAAP.
This change could result in the identification of more options as material rights
under Topic 606 than under legacy US GAAP.



                  Question C380
                  Are usage (or transaction) based fees in a software
                  licensing arrangement variable consideration or an
                  ‘optional purchase’?
Interpretive response: Generally, it will be variable consideration. This is
because, in a software licensing arrangement, the nature of the entity’s
promise to the customer is to grant the customer a right to use the entity’s
software (i.e. a license). Once that right of use is transferred to the customer
(see Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
performance obligation), the entity does not have to transfer additional rights of
use (or other goods or services) to the customer for them to be able to use that
right – e.g. process transactions using the software.
That the customer will pay for the license based on its usage thereof – e.g.
number of transactions processed or sales of the customer’s products that use




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              265
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




the entity’s software – rather than a fixed fee, does not change the nature of
the arrangement; fundamentally, the promise to the customer is to grant the
software license. Once the customer controls its right to use the software, the
customer’s subsequent use of that right does not involve the customer
undertaking a decision to make an additional purchase from the entity, and
therefore each usage is not an optional service. Instead, the usage-based fee is
variable consideration related to the transferred software license.



                   Question C385
                   Are usage (or transaction) based fees in a SaaS
                   arrangement variable consideration or an ‘optional
                   purchase’?
Interpretive response: It depends. In general, we believe that if the nature of
the promise is fundamentally for the entity to provide unlimited continuous
access to its hosted application, a customer’s use of its access to the hosted
application does not involve the customer undertaking a decision to make an
additional purchase from the entity. In that case, each usage of the SaaS is not
the purchase of an optional service.
In contrast, a SaaS arrangement could be structured in a manner similar to
many service arrangements in which a service provider agrees to perform a
defined task if called upon to do so for a specified fee. For example, a customer
may have the right under a contract to upload data to a hosted application and
have that application produce one or more reports using that data for a fee
specific to that request. The arrangement in that case may involve little more
than the promise that if the customer accesses the service via the internet and
uploads the data, the hosted application will return the requested report and, in
that case, the customer makes an affirmative decision to acquire a report using
the system and pay the required fee. Similarly, the customer could contract for
a specified quantity of services (e.g. process a specified number of
transactions) and have the option to acquire incremental distinct services (e.g.
additional transactions for an additional fee once that quantity has been
diminished.
Determining the nature of the promise to the customer in a SaaS arrangement
may require significant judgment. The following indicates the nature of the
promise is one to stand ready or provide a single continuous service and
therefore the usage-based fee is variable consideration.
— The entity is continuously transferring control of the service to the
  customer by providing access to the services and the customer’s usage
  occurs as the entity is transferring control.
— The customer’s increase in usage does not change the entity’s obligation or
  provide the customer with incremental rights to services for the remainder
  of the term (i.e. the obligation to the customer does not diminish).
— The customer is not making a separate purchasing decision that results in
  an entity having additional obligations to the customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              266
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




In addition, we believe the following factors could also suggest that the
arrangement is one to provide a service of continuous access to a hosted
application rather than providing the customer an option to obtain incremental
services – e.g. production of a specific report or processing of a specific
transaction – that merely uses software hosted by the entity or a third party
engaged by the entity to provide.
— The customer is not required to execute an additional contract, whether
  characterized as a purchase order, an addendum, an amendment, a
  modification of the existing contract, or a termination of the existing
  contract and creation of a new contract. These actions typically suggest an
  affirmative, additional purchasing decision by the customer to acquire
  incremental services.
— The entity maintains significant infrastructure, particularly dedicated
  infrastructure, to fulfill the terms of the contract.
— The presence of a service-level provision anchored to availability of the
  SaaS. For example, a provision that entitles the customer to service-level
  credits if system or application availability is less than XX% during the
  measurement period suggests the nature of the promise to the customer is
  continuous access to that system or application.
— The presence of a significant fixed fee component (regardless of whether
  it is payable upfront or over time), particularly if that fixed fee is a significant
  portion of the overall consideration the entity expects to earn from the
  contract, suggests that the customer ascribes significant value to the
  availability of the system or application, not just on the ability to obtain
  specified outputs. A significant fixed fee component may be written in the
  contract as a guaranteed transaction- or usage-based minimum.
— Usage of the hosted system or application is outside the control of the
  customer. For example, if the arrangement between the entity and the
  customer is to process transactions when-and-as they are initiated in the
  system, but the customer’s customers initiate those transactions in the
  system, it implies that each transaction processed is not an ‘optional
  purchase’. This is because the customer has no role in deciding whether
  transactions are initiated in the system.



                   Example C385.1
                   SaaS usage based fees
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide SaaS that allows
Customer to process transactions. Customer does not have the right to take
possession of the hosted software.
Scenario 1: Usage-based fees are variable consideration
ABC provides Customer with continuous unlimited access to its SaaS that
Customer is obligated to use to process an unspecified number of transactions
as they occur. ABC must provide access to the SaaS regardless of the number
of transactions processed and the number of transactions processed by ABC is




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              267
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




outside of both ABC’s and Customer’s control. ABC charges customer $10 per
transaction processed.
ABC concludes that the nature of the promise is one of standing ready as ABC
is obligated to provide continuous access to its SaaS to Customer and
Customer has the ability to use an unlimited amount of SaaS to process an
unlimited amount of transactions over the contract term and those rights do not
diminish.
ABC also concludes that the transaction fees are variable consideration as the
Customer compensates ABC based on its usage of the SaaS rather than
Customer acquiring additional rights. This is evidenced by the following:
— Customer is not required to exercise or execute an additional contract.
— Customer’s usage is outside of its control as the number of transactions is
  dictated by Customer’s customers.
— Customer’s usage resets after each transaction (i.e. rights do not diminish).
— Customer does not obtain any incremental rights as a result of each
  transaction being processed because at contract inception it obtained a
  present right to process an unlimited number of transactions.
Scenario 2: Overages are variable consideration
Assume the same facts as scenario 1 except that ABC charges Customer a
fixed fee of $300,000 and an overage fee of $10 for each transaction over
10,000 in a contract year.
ABC concludes that the nature of the promise is one of standing ready as ABC
is obligated to provide continuous access to its SaaS to Customer and
Customer has the ability to use an unlimited amount of SaaS to process an
unlimited number of transactions over the contract term and those rights do not
diminish.
ABC also concludes that the overage fees are variable consideration as the
Customer compensates ABC based on its usage of the SaaS rather than
Customer acquiring additional rights. This is evidenced by the following:
— Customer is not required to exercise or execute an additional contract.
— Customer’s usage is outside of its control as the number of transactions is
  dictated by Customer’s customers.
— Customer’s usage resets after each transaction (i.e. rights do not diminish).
— Customer does not obtain any incremental rights as a result of each
  transaction being processed because at contract inception it obtained a
  present right to process an unlimited number of transactions.
— Customer pays a significant fixed fee.
Scenario 3: Overages as optional purchases
ABC provides transaction processing services through its SaaS platform. ABC
contracts with Customer to process 100 transactions for $10 per transaction.
Customer’s rights to the 100 transactions expires as each transaction is
consumed and Customer has the option to acquire additional transactions for an
additional $10 per transaction. In order to receive processing for more than 100
transactions, Customer must execute the contractual option and the ability to
obtain this additional processing is in Customer’s control (i.e. in contrast to
Scenarios 1 and 2, Customer is not obligated to process transactions with ABC




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              268
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




based on the actions of its customers and can make a decision to process (or
not to process) incremental transactions).
ABC concludes that the nature of the promise is to provide a service of
processing 100 transactions rather than a stand-ready obligation or continuous
access to its SaaS platform because there is a specified quantity of services
that significantly diminish over the contract term and the network provides no
benefit to the customer beyond the processed transactions.
ABC concludes the additional transactions are optional purchases based on the
following.
— Customer has the choice to purchase additional services (the transactions)
  and until that decision is made ABC is not obligated to perform any
  services.
— Each transaction processed is a distinct service that was not contracted for
  by Customer in the initial contract.
— Each additional transaction changes Customer’s rights because Customer
  cannot further use ABC’s services without making the decision to purchase
  additional transaction processing.
— While ABC has substantial infrastructure, it is not dedicated to Customer.



                   Question C390
                   Is a provision permitting a customer to obtain
                   additional copies of a software product subject to
                   the customer option guidance or does it describe a
                   usage-based royalty?
Interpretive response: A software license is just an example of a promised
good or service. Consequently, a provision that permits a customer to obtain
additional software licenses (whether characterized as users, seats or
otherwise) is subject to the same customer option guidance as any other
provision that permits a customer to obtain additional goods or services that are
not licenses. In contrast, as outlined in Question C40, a customer’s usage of a
license that it already controls is not the exercise of a customer option – i.e. the
customer is not making an ‘optional purchase’.
Whether a contract provision permitting a customer to obtain additional copies
of a software product is an option to acquire additional software licenses is
fundamentally the same question as whether a promise to provide multiple
copies of licensed software is a promise to transfer multiple software licenses
(see Question C40). If a promise to transfer multiple copies of a software
product is considered a promise to transfer multiple software licenses to the
customer, a right to acquire those same copies is an option to acquire additional
software licenses.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              269
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Consequently, in determining whether a contract provision describes an option
to acquire additional licenses to a software product or a usage-based fee, an
entity must determine whether that contract provision, however characterized:
— describes a right for the customer to acquire incremental capabilities to
  make use of the software – for which, by nature, the customer makes an
  additional purchasing decision when it decides to acquire those incremental
  rights; or
— merely describes how the customer will compensate the vendor for the
  use of the rights and capabilities that it already controls.
This determination will frequently require judgment because the two types of
provisions are often worded similarly in contracts. However, we believe the
following are some factors to consider in making this distinction (none of which
should be considered individually determinative).
— Whether the customer is required to execute an additional contract –
  whether characterized as an addendum, an amendment, or papered as
  either a modification of the existing contract or a termination of the existing
  contract and creation of a new contract. This typically suggests an
  affirmative, additional purchasing decision to acquire incremental rights and
  capabilities to use the entity’s software that the customer does not already
  control. A customer would not be expected to enter into an additional
  contract merely to exercise rights that it already controls under an existing
  contract. In fact, as outlined in Question C380, usage of existing rights of
  use is often outside the control of those making purchasing decisions. For
  example, usage may be triggered by the customer’s customers, or may be
  the result of employees far from the procurement process using tools that
  they have been provided to process transactions, conduct research or
  produce reports.
— Whether the customer is required to make an affirmative request of the
  vendor – e.g. to deliver additional copies or additional software keys. This
  may suggest that the customer is making an affirmative decision to request
  additional rights or capabilities from the vendor. A customer would not, in
  contrast, typically enter into a contract that requires such affirmative action
  from the vendor merely to exercise the rights that it already controls; any
  such provision would likely call into question whether the customer actually
  controls those rights.
— An incremental right or capability usually exists concurrently with the
  existing right(s) that have previously been transferred to the customer. For
  example, in Example 61B in Topic 606, the customer obtains the
  incremental right to embed the entity’s software into another class of its
  consumer products one year after obtaining the initial right to embed the
  entity’s software in the first class of consumer products. That right
  increases the customer’s rights under the contract and the customer’s
  ability to derive benefit from use of the software. The example concludes
  that the customer now has rights to embed the vendor’s software into
  two classes of consumer products rather than only the one. [606-10-55-399K –
      55-399O]

— For instance, a customer’s utilization of software may be directly linked to
  the number of users or seats the customer has rights to deploy. If that
  customer has the right to increase from 50 user or seat licenses to 75 user



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              270
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




      or seat licenses, it has the present right (at its option) to significantly
      increase its capabilities from use of the software. Those incremental
      capabilities from the additional 25 user or seat licenses will exist together
      with the capabilities from the original 50 user or seat licenses.
— In contrast, usage typically occurs and is consumed – e.g. a transaction is
  processed, a call is fielded, or a product is sold that includes the embedded
  software. One ‘usage’ is not additive to another.
— An incremental right, once obtained, will frequently be granted for the
  remainder of the term of the original right(s) of use and/or have to be
  canceled. For example, a customer that decides to add 100 user licenses
  may have a continuing obligation to pay for those additional licenses (e.g.
  additional periodic license fees and/or PCS fees) until it elects to terminate
  those rights. Termination includes not electing to renew; Topic 606 does
  not distinguish between decisions to renew and decisions not to terminate,
  or vice versa. [ASU 2014-09.BC391]
— In contrast, usage typically occurs and resets each measurement period
  i.e. the usage occurs and ends on its own. For example, while an entity
  might expect a customer to process at least a minimum number of
  transactions during a given measurement period, those transactions occur
  and end, and it is only new transactions that trigger additional usage-based
  fees to the entity in the next measurement period.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The requirement to account for a significant incremental discount on additional
licenses of a software product for which one or more licenses have already
been transferred to the customer is a change from the legacy US GAAP. Legacy
US GAAP provided an exception to its guidance on accounting for significant
incremental discounts as additional elements to a software arrangement for
discounts offered on additional copies of software products for which the
product master had already been delivered to the customer.
With respect to identifying contract provisions as options to acquire additional
licenses or as usage-based fees, in general, the distinction was not important
under legacy US GAAP. Because legacy US GAAP provided the above
exception, the accounting that would result from either conclusion (i.e. that a
provision was an option to acquire additional licenses or a usage-based fee)
was the same. Entities generally recognized usage-based fees when the
customer’s subsequent usage occurred and recognized revenue from
customer options when the option was exercised (assuming no additional
deliveries of software were required).
Consequently, there was little guidance in legacy US GAAP, or developed
interpretively, distinguishing between options and usage-based fees. That being
said, Subtopic 985-605-55 included guidance that usage-based fees were
determined by applying a constant multiplier to the frequency that the licensee
used the software – e.g. customer call center software wherein a fee of $.01 is
charged for each call handled.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              271
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Under Topic 606, the distinction between options and usage-based fees
matters:
— an option to acquire additional software licenses may provide the customer
  with a material right; while
— usage-based fees associated with software licenses will, consistent with
  legacy US GAAP, generally be recognized when the customer’s usage
  occurs (due to the sale- or usage-based royalties guidance for licenses of
  intellectual property – see Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or
  as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation).
Topic 606 does not define a ‘usage-based fee’. Therefore, judgment is
necessary to distinguish between customer options to acquire additional
software licenses and usage-based fee provisions.



                  Example C390.1
                  Option to acquire additional licenses vs
                  usage-based fee
Software Vendor S enters into a contract with Customer T to license its on-
premise software used to route customer service tickets to the appropriate
departments and locations for four years. Under the contract, 50 concurrent
users are permitted to use the software. With 50 concurrent users, Customer T
can route approximately 100,000 tickets each week.
Per the contract, Customer T will pay a fixed, upfront fee of $500,000 and will
also pay $0.50 per ticket routed using the software. The contract permits
Customer T to increase its concurrent user maximum for the duration of the
license period in blocks of five concurrent users at a rate of $4,000 per block.
That $4,000 rate decreases throughout the license period in proportion to how
much of the license period remains at the time concurrent users are added –
e.g. the fixed, incremental fee for a five-user ‘block’ when there are two years
remaining in the license period would be $2,000.
The per ticket fee of $0.50 applies to all tickets routed using Software Vendor
S’s software, regardless of how many concurrent users are presently permitted
to use the software.
Software Vendor S concludes that:
— the provision permitting Customer T to add concurrent users is a customer
  option to acquire additional licenses to Software Vendor S’s software; and
— the $0.50 per ticket fee is a usage-based royalty that links the contract
  consideration to the customer’s use of the license rights it has transferred
  initially.
Customer T already controls the right, upon transfer of the original 50
concurrent user rights, to process up to 100,000 tickets per week. There are no
further rights for Software Vendor S to transfer to Customer T, and it is not an
optional purchase by Customer T, reflective of an additional purchasing
decision, to exercise the rights it already controls.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              272
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




In contrast, the addition of concurrent users increases Customer T’s ability to
derive benefit from use of the software by increasing its capability to route
customer service tickets on a basis proportional to the incremental user rights it
obtains; those increased rights are additive to and exist concurrently with those
it already controls. The addition of concurrent users therefore represents the
acquisition of additional licenses to use Software Vendor S’s software, which
Customer T undertakes an additional purchasing decision to acquire.



                  Example C390.2
                  User-based provision that is a usage-based fee
Software Entity R enters into a three-year software licensing arrangement with
Customer W for its research application whereby Customer W will pay
Software Entity R a fixed upfront fee of $10,000 plus a $50 fee for each user
that logs into the application each month.
If a user logs into the system each of the 36 months of the arrangement,
Customer W will owe Software Entity R $1,800 for that user, on top of the
fixed license fee paid upfront. All users require a unique username and
password, and Software Entity R has various audit rights to help ensure all
users are registering.
Software Entity R concludes that the user-based fee is a usage-based royalty,
rather than a customer option to acquire incremental rights (beyond those
transferred at contract inception) to use the research software.
Software Entity R considers the following in making this judgment.
— A Customer W employee does not have to obtain anything from Software
  Entity R to use the software. It can create a username and password and
  use the software under that username and password without notifying or
  contacting Software Entity R.
— Customer W does not execute an additional contract with Software Entity R
  when one of its employees creates an account or uses the research
  software.
— A user’s usage in a given month, which triggers the user-based fee, does
  not create an ongoing obligation for the remainder of the license term or
  require an affirmative action to cancel. Rather, it resets each month. For
  example, if User #1 uses the research software in Month 1 of the
  arrangement and never uses it again, Customer W will only owe the $50
  user-based fee for User #1 for Month 1.
— A user’s use of the system does not create an incremental right that
  increases the overall capabilities of the software to Customer W in the way
  it did in Example 390.1. The rights that Customer W controls for its
  employees to use Software Entity R’s research software are not different in
  a month in which 100 Customer W employees use the software versus a
  month in which 10 or 500 Customer W employees use the software.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              273
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                  Example C390.3
                  Metric-based provision
Software Entity Q enters into a perpetual software licensing arrangement with
Customer G for its accounting application. Customer G’s license fee is initially
determined based on its annual revenues. At contract inception, the fee (to be
paid upfront) of $100,000 is based on annual revenues of $100 million.
If Customer G’s annual revenues increase beyond defined thresholds,
Customer G will pay additional license fees. For example, Customer G will owe
an additional license fee if its annual revenues surpass $125 million, a further
fee if they then surpass $150 million, etc.
Software Entity Q concludes that the revenue-based fee provision does not
represent a customer option to acquire additional licenses. This is because
while Customer G is likely to make greater use of Software Entity Q’s software
as it grows (evidenced by its increasing revenues), at the point in time the
license is transferred to Customer G, Customer’s G license is already capable of
supporting Customer G as a $125 million or $150 million company.
Therefore, the additional fee does not represent an option for Customer G to
acquire additional rights and capabilities that it does not control when the initial
license is transferred. Rather, the revenue-based fee provision represents an
additional fee based on Customer G’s usage – based on a revenue metric rather
than a direct measure of usage such as transactions processed – of those rights
and capabilities.



                   Question C400
                   Is a provision permitting a customer to add users (or
                   seats) to a SaaS subscription a customer option or
                   variable consideration?
Interpretive response: It depends. We believe determining whether a
provision permitting the customer to add users or seats to a SaaS arrangement
describes a customer option or a usage-based fee involves fundamentally the
same considerations as outlined in Question C390 and evaluating usage based
fees in a SaaS arrangement in Question C385.
If the additional user or seat is an option to acquire an additional distinct good or
service that is incremental to the rights to the SaaS the entity currently has,
then the provision is generally a customer option. Factors that indicate the
provision is an optional purchase include but are not limited to:
— the nature of the promise is to provide SaaS for a defined number of users
  or seats over the contract term and the option provides incremental rights;
— the customer’s rights are limited to the number of users or seats until the
  option is exercised;
— the customer option requires a separate purchasing decision to acquire
  incremental users or seats;
— the additional users or seats once obtained are purchased for the remainder
  of the contract term; and



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              274
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




— the provision of service for each user or seat is distinct from another user or
  seat.
If the additional user or seat provision is a payment mechanism that describes
the customer’s right to use the service it has already obtained, it is generally
variable consideration. Factors that indicate the provision is variable
consideration include but are not limited to:
— the nature of the promise is to provide continuous access to SaaS for an
  unlimited number of users or seats over the contract term;
— the customer’s rights are unlimited;
— the number of users or seats resets each measurement period (i.e. the
  customer’s rights do not diminish and the amount of users or seats in one
  contractual period does not affect the payments in the next contractual
  period); and
— the benefit from the additional user or seat is consumed and not
  attributable to the remainder of the contract term.



                   Example C400.1
                   SaaS user based fees
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide Customer with
access to its hosted software application for three years. Customer does not
have the right to take possession of the hosted software.
Scenario 1: User based fees are optional purchases
ABC provides Customer its SaaS for 100 users for $100,000. Customer has the
ability to exercise an option in the contract to add a user for the remainder of
the contract term for an additional $1,000 pro-rated for the remainder of the
contract term.
ABC concludes that the incremental user-based fee represents an optional
purchase rather than variable consideration because each incremental user
represents Customer acquiring additional rights as follows:
— The nature of the SaaS is to stand ready but on a per user basis rather than
  for the contract as a whole. That is, the nature of the promise is to provide
  stand-ready access to a contractually specified number of users.
— Customer is required to execute a contractual option to acquire an
  incremental user.
— Customer obtains incremental rights because before exercising the option it
  did not have a present right for the incremental user to access the SaaS.
— Customer’s rights to the incremental user are granted for the remainder of
  the contract term rather than resetting.
ABC would evaluate whether the option for incremental users is a material
right.
Scenario 2: User based fees are variable consideration
ABC provides Customer with unlimited access to its SaaS and charges
Customer $10 per user per month. The number of users resets each month.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              275
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Customer does not execute an additional contract for each user and ABC bills
Customer based on the number of users each month.
ABC concludes that the user-based fees are variable consideration as the
Customer compensates ABC based on its usage of the SaaS rather than
Customer acquiring additional rights. This is evidenced by the following:
— The nature of the promise is one of standing ready as ABC is obligated to
  provide continuous access to Customer and Customer can use an unlimited
  amount of SaaS over the contract term.
— Customer is not required to execute a separate contract to add a user.
— Customer does not obtain any incremental rights for each user as it already
  had a present right to unlimited users.
Customer’s usage resets each month and the usage for each month is
consumed rather than acquiring rights for the remainder of the term.



                   Question C410
                   Are renewal options for services promised goods or
                   services in a contract?

Interpretive response: A renewal option for services (e.g. SaaS, PCS or
hosting services in a software licensing arrangement) gives a customer the right
to acquire additional goods or services of the same type as those supplied
under an existing contract. It does not create enforceable rights and obligations
for the parties, and therefore a renewal option does not represent a promised
service in the contract.
Further, as described in the basis for conclusions to ASU 2014-09, a three-
year contract that allows the customer to cancel at the end of each year is no
different from a one-year contract with two one-year renewal options –
provided there is not a substantive termination penalty the customer must pay
if it elects an option to cancel. If a customer must pay a substantive
termination penalty to cancel a service contract, the contracted service period
includes all of the periods for which, if the customer canceled the service, the
termination penalty would apply. This issue is addressed in further detail in
Chapter B – Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer. [ASU 2014-09.BC391]
However, a renewal option (or an option to continue a service contract by not
terminating) does create an additional performance obligation in a contract if it
provides the customer with a material right that it could not otherwise obtain
without entering into the contract. A renewal option that does not provide the
customer with a material right is not accounted for as part of the original
contract; rather, it is treated as a new contract when it is exercised by the
customer. A renewal option usually provides the customer with a material right
if the renewal price for the services is lower than the price for the same
services the entity offers to similarly situated customers that have not entered
into a contract with the entity previously.
A renewal price may be discounted either explicitly or implicitly. A renewal
price is discounted explicitly when there is a stated renewal price in the
contract that is lower than the price for the same services that the entity




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              276
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




offers to similarly situated customers that have not entered into a contract
with the entity previously. An implicit discount might arise when the customer
pays a nonrefundable upfront fee in connection with the initial services
contract that it does not have to pay again in order to renew the service; for
example, a fee that is not a payment for a promised service, such as
implementation services. See further discussion below and Questions D20 on
upfront fees.
Some have questioned whether an entity considers the renewal option price as
compared to the stand-alone selling price for the goods or services at contract
inception or, instead, to an expected renewal price at the end of the contracted
service period. In general, we do not believe a renewal option priced at the
contract inception stand-alone selling price of the service provides a material
right to the customer. This is because, even though this may not occur
frequently, the customer could exercise the option immediately after contract
inception. We do not believe an entity is required to forecast what the stand-
alone selling price for a good or service will be in the future and, in any event,
believe that any such forecast would be potentially unreliable given that
economic circumstances could change significantly or new competition could
enter the marketplace that render any previous expectations obsolete.
Evaluating upfront fees
The objective of evaluating whether an upfront fee provides a material right is to
identify the periods that the customer benefits from not having to pay another
fee upon exercising a renewal option. The period the customer benefits from
the renewal includes only those periods that the fee influences the customer’s
decision to exercise its option. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 32]
The entity considers both quantitative and qualitative factors to evaluate the
presence of a material right. We believe the following factors should be
considered to identify the periods (if any) for which a nonrefundable upfront fee
provides a material right.
— The renewal price compared with the price in the initial contract with
  the upfront fee. The significance of the upfront fee and amounts paid for
  the initial services compared to renewals could influence a customer’s
  decision to renew. The customer may be economically compelled to renew
  based on its initial investment.
— The availability and pricing of service alternatives. For example, if the
  customer could readily obtain similar services without having to pay an
  upfront fee, the initial payment may not be an incentive for the customer to
  renew because it could easily obtain services elsewhere at prices similar to
  the renewal price.
— History of renewals. If the entity has a strong history of renewals, it might
  indicate that the upfront fee provides an incentive for the customer to
  exercise its renewal option. For example, an entity might look at the
  average customer life or periods where the customers renew at a high rate.
If the fee provides a material right, the period the customer benefits from the
fee may be shorter than the average customer life. This is because there may
be many factors other than the upfront fee that influence a customer to renew
a contract. For example, the quality of service and convenience of not changing
providers could influence the customer to renew, but those renewals would not



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              277
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




mean the customer was provided a material right when it paid the upfront fee.
As a consequence, significant judgment will be required to determine the
period for which a material right is present.
See Question E390 and Example E390.1 for further information on allocating
the transaction price to material rights as a result of nonrefundable upfront fees.



                  Example C410.1
                  SaaS renewal option
Scenario 1: Option to renew is a material right
SaaS Provider A enters into a contract with Customer D to provide D access to
its payroll processing software through a SaaS arrangement. Customer D can
use the software through a web-based interface but cannot download the
software for use offline. Customer D pays the contracted SaaS fees on a
quarterly basis, in advance.
The arrangement is for one year, for a contracted rate of $1,200. Customer D
can renew the contract for additional one-year periods at SaaS Provider A’s
then-current market rate for similar customers.
Customer D is required to pay a $200 non-refundable upfront fee to SaaS
Provider A at contract inception but will not have to make that payment again if
it renews the contract for additional one-year periods.
The $200 fee is not a payment for an additional good or service (i.e. in addition
to the SaaS). This is because, while SaaS Provider A undertakes activities to set
up the customer’s access to the software application, those activities do not
provide any incremental benefit to the customer. They are merely necessary for
Customer D to be able to access the SaaS promised in the contract. As a result,
in substance, the fee for the contracted one-year period of service, which is the
only promised good or service in the contract, is $1,400.
SaaS Provider A concludes that the option to renew the arrangement provides
Customer D with a material right.
In reaching this conclusion, SaaS Provider A considers that there are factors
other than payment of the upfront fee that will likely influence Customer D’s
decision to renew the arrangement after the one-year period – e.g.
consideration of costs incurred by Customer D to migrate data to the SaaS
solution or train HR employees, SaaS Provider A’s performance and customer
service and the availability/cost of suitable alternatives. However, the upfront
fee of $200 is quantitatively material enough to the contracted SaaS fee of
$1,200 such that payment of that amount upfront provides a material right to
Customer D compared to other similar customers that are not currently
customers of SaaS Provider A that would have to pay that $200 fee to obtain
access to the SaaS. That investment would be expected to affect the
customer’s decision about whether to renew the arrangement independent of
the other factors that would also typically influence Customer A’s renewal
decision.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              278
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Scenario 2: Option to renew is not a material right (1)
Assume the same facts and circumstances as Scenario 1 except that the
committed contract term is three years, rather than one year. Therefore, the
contracted fee is $3,800.
SaaS Provider A concludes that the payment of the $200 upfront fee does not
provide Customer D with a material right with respect to renewal of the SaaS
– i.e. the ability to renew the contract after three years without having to pay
a second upfront fee is not a material right.
In reaching this conclusion, SaaS Provider A considers the effective annual SaaS
fee for the initial three-year contract of $1,267 ($3,800 ÷ 3 years) versus the
annual renewal price of $1,200. It concludes that that difference, and payment of
the upfront fee three years ago, are not likely to significantly affect Customer D’s
decision to renew the SaaS.
Given the long-term nature of the initial SaaS period, other factors are more
likely to significantly influence Customer D’s decision to renew the SaaS.
These factors include the costs Customer D would incur to transition to
another alternative, the availability/cost of a suitable alternative and SaaS
Provider A’s performance under the initial arrangement (e.g. service uptime
versus downtime and performance in providing technical support).
Scenario 3: Option to renew is not a material right (2)
Assume the same facts and circumstances as Scenario 1, except that there is
no upfront fee and Customer D has the option to renew the SaaS at a price of
$1,200, consistent with the fee for the committed one-year term.
The price of $1,200 for the renewal period represents the stand-alone selling
price of the SaaS at contract inception but is likely to be less than the renewal
date stand-alone selling price to a new, similar customer. This is because SaaS
Provider A has been increasing its one-year contract pricing by approximately
5% each year over the last seven years; and expects to continue to do so,
because its market share and reputation has grown in the marketplace and in
order to keep its fees paced with inflation and other increasing costs.
The option in this scenario does not provide Customer D with a material right.
Even though the stand-alone selling price of the SaaS is expected to increase
during the term of the arrangement based on historical pricing changes and
current plans of SaaS Provider A management, Customer D could elect to
exercise the renewal option immediately after contract inception. At that point,
the renewal price is the same as the stand-alone selling price of the SaaS.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              279
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question C411
                   Is a retroactive discount earned once a customer
                   has completed a specified volume of optional
                   purchases subject to the guidance on material
                   rights?
Interpretive response: No. Volume discounts (or rebates) that are retroactive
are accounted for as variable consideration because the final transaction price is
unknown until the customer completes (or fails to complete) the specified
volume of purchase. See Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price
and Questions C380, C385, C390 and C400 on distinguishing between
contracts with variable consideration and optional purchases.



                   Question C412
                   Is a prospective discount earned once a customer
                   has completed a specified volume of optional
                   purchases subject to the guidance on material
                   rights?
Interpretive response: Yes. A prospective volume discount (or rebate) earned
once a customer has completed a specified volume of optional purchases is not
variable consideration. Therefore, the potential discount or rebate on the
optional goods or services needs to be evaluated for the presence of a material
right. Such discounts are not variable consideration because they do not change
the consideration for the goods or services transferred under the current
contract. See Questions C380 through C400 on distinguishing between
contracts with variable consideration and optional purchases.



                   Question C413
                   Does the practical expedient for immaterial
                   promises apply to customer options?
Interpretive response: No. Topic 606 allows an entity to forgo assessing
whether promised goods or services are performance obligations if they are
immaterial in the context of the contract with the customer.
However, this exception does not apply to the evaluation of customer options.
Therefore, even if a customer option is immaterial in the context of the
contract, an entity evaluates whether it conveys a material right. This is because
customer options may accumulate over time across many contracts and that
accumulation feature may cause an option that is immaterial in the context of
one contract to be material to the customer. [606-10-25-16B]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              280
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question C420
                   When assessing the amount of an incremental
                   discount offered to a customer, should the entity
                   look to the high-end of any “range of discounts
                   typically given for those goods or services to that
                   ‘class of customer’ in that geographical area or
                   market”, to the midpoint of that range or the
                   median, or some other amount such as the mean?
Interpretive response: We believe entities should adopt a reasonable approach
and apply that approach on a consistent basis. Depending on the
circumstances, any of those might be a reasonable approach to determine the
incremental discount of a customer option.



                   Question C430
                   How should an entity evaluate if an option provides
                   the customer with a material right when the stand-
                   alone selling price of the good or service subject to
                   the option is highly variable or uncertain?
Interpretive response: Determining if a material right exists for options to
purchase licenses of IP or other products for which the stand-alone selling price
is highly variable or uncertain may require significant judgment. This is because
a comparison of the option price to a stand-alone selling price (or even a
relatively narrow range of stand-alone selling prices) is not possible.
Entities need to consider all relevant and available evidence in determining whether
the purchase option is a material right in these circumstances, and we believe that
there may be multiple, acceptable approaches to undertaking this evaluation.
— One example of an approach we believe is acceptable is to analyze the
  option price against a range of stand-alone selling prices for that good or
  service established in previous contracts. This is even if those stand-alone
  selling prices were established using a residual approach (including where
  that license was part of a ‘residual bundle’ of goods or services).
— Another approach we believe is acceptable is to evaluate whether the
  purchase option provides a discount to the customer that is incremental to
  the range of discounts reflected in the pricing of the other promised goods
  and services in the contract (e.g. discounts from list price offered on the
  promised goods or services in the contract).
The implementation guidance in Topic 606 does not contain the notion that
existed in legacy US GAAP that a ‘more-than-insignificant discount’ must be
‘incremental to the range of discounts reflected in the pricing of the other
elements of the arrangement’. Therefore, we do not believe the range of
discounts reflected in the pricing of the other promised goods or services in the
contract should influence the determination of whether an option provides the
customer with a material right except when the stand-alone selling price of the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              281
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




good or service that is the subject of the option is highly variable or uncertain. In
that limited circumstance, we believe consideration of the pricing of the
promised goods and services in the contract is a reasonable approach because
a comparison to the stand-alone selling price of the good or service (as per
paragraph 606-10-55-43) would be meaningless because the stand-alone selling
price is highly variable or uncertain.
In any approach where the entity’s established list prices are a data point
(including the above examples), we would expect the entity’s established list
prices to be substantive. This means that changes to the price list must be
subject to the entity’s effective internal controls (including who can authorize its
updating) and there is a systematic process for any triggers resulting in
adjustments to the price list.
Whatever approach an entity adopts to make this judgmental evaluation, we
expect it to be applied consistently in similar circumstances.



                  Example C430.1
                  Evaluating whether an option for a good or service
                  with a highly variable stand-alone selling price
                  grants a material right to the customer
ABC Corp. sells a software license for Product A along with technical support
and rights to when-and-if available updates/upgrades (i.e. PCS) for one year to
Customer XYZ. The contract also includes an option to purchase a license for
Product B at a 65% discount from the published list price of $1,000,000 (i.e. for
$350,000).
The contract price for the license to Product A and the related PCS (which is
based on a percentage of the stated license fee) are discounted 50% from the
entity’s price list. ABC’s price list is substantive and well controlled.
Product B has been licensed to 25 similar customers in the United States within
the last few months, always bundled with technical support and unspecified
update/upgrade rights. ABC has an observable stand-alone selling price for its
technical support and unspecified update/upgrade rights (as a PCS bundle), but
has determined that the stand-alone selling price for a license to Product B is
highly variable. Therefore, ABC has used the residual approach to estimate the
stand-alone selling price for Product B in each of its 25 previous contracts that
included a license to Product B.
Alternative 1
ABC compares the discount offered on the license to Product B in its 25 previous
license sales, calculated as the difference between the estimated stand-alone
selling prices established through the residual approach and the then-current list
price to the discount from the current list price being offered to XYZ.
From this process, ABC determines that the normal range of discounts it has
previously provided from the list price on licenses of Product B is 30% to 50%.
Therefore, the 65% discount being offered from list price on the option to
license Product B provides Customer XYZ with a material right. This is because




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              282
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




it is incremental to the range of discounts (30% to 50%) previously provided for
Product B to similar customers.
Alternative 2
ABC compares the discount from list price offered on the license to Product B
of 65% to the 50% discount from list price provided in the same contract with
XYZ on the license to Product A and related PCS. As a result, ABC concludes
that the incremental discount (i.e. 15%) on the option to purchase a license to
Product B provides XYZ with a material right. ABC will estimate the stand-alone
selling price of the option based on the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-55-44 –
55-45.
Note:
If the discount from list price offered on the license to Product B was 50% (or less), ABC
would have concluded that the option to purchase a license to Product B did not provide
Customer XYZ with a material right.



                   Question C440
                   Does a customer option to convert a term software
                   license into a perpetual license represent an
                   additional promised good or service in the contract?
Interpretive response: A customer option to convert a term software license
into a perpetual license represents an additional promised good or service in the
contract only if the option provides the customer with a material right. In that
case, the material right is an additional performance obligation in the contract.
A perpetual license to a software product is a different good from a term
license to the same software product. Consequently, an option to acquire a
perpetual license to a software product already subject to a term license is,
fundamentally, no different from an option to acquire a perpetual license to a
different software product not already subject to a term license.
Question C430 discusses how an entity should evaluate whether an option to
acquire a software license with a highly variable or uncertain stand-alone selling
price provides the customer with a material right. If the stand-alone selling price
for the perpetual license is not highly variable or uncertain, the considerations
about whether the option provides a material right to the customer are no
different from any customer option to acquire any other good or service.
If the customer exercises its option to convert a term license to a perpetual
license, and that perpetual license is distinct – i.e. the option is not exercised
together with services that are not distinct from that license, such as services
to customize the licensed software – the fee attributable to the perpetual
license cannot be recognized until after the end of the current term license
period. For example, if the customer currently has a three-year license expiring
on December 31, Year 7, and exercises its perpetual conversion option on
June 30, Year 7, the entity cannot recognize revenue from the exercise of that
option before January 1, Year 8.
We believe that this is consistent with the guidance in Topic 606 that if the
customer exercises an option to renew a term license, the entity cannot



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              283
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




recognize revenue from that renewal until the beginning of the renewal period
(see Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
performance obligation). The equivalent notion for the exercise of a perpetual
conversion option is to recognize that revenue no earlier than after the end of
the current term license period when, in effect, the perpetual renewal
commences.
Consistent with any other software license, the entity will also need to consider
the other guidance in Topic 606 when determining the point in time to
recognize the perpetual license – e.g. whether the entity has to provide another
copy of the software because the copy of the software delivered for the term
license contains a self-destruct or similar mechanism to allow the entity to
control the usage of its software. However, we expect that typically the
commencement of the perpetual license period will be the ‘limiting factor’ that
will trigger revenue recognition. [606-10-55-58B – 55-58C]




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy US GAAP is different from the accounting under Topic 606 in two
respects.
— Legacy US GAAP concluded that the perpetual conversion option was not
  an additional element of the arrangement, even if it was being offered at a
  significant and incremental discount. Therefore, there are perpetual
  conversion options that may be accounted for as performance obligations
  under Topic 606 (i.e. if they provide the customer with a material right) that
  are not accounted for as additional arrangement elements under legacy
  US GAAP.
— Neither Topic 606 nor legacy US GAAP would permit recognition of any fee
  for the perpetual license to be recognized before any additional (or new)
  copy of the software that is necessary to extend the term license
  perpetually is provided. However, legacy US GAAP recognized the option
  fee when that software was delivered (or at the option exercise date if no
  additional software delivery was required). This is likely earlier than when
  Topic 606 will permit recognition, which is not until after the then-current
  term license expires.



                   Question C450
                   Does a discount need to be significant in addition to
                   being incremental to the range of discounts
                   typically offered to similar customers for it to
                   represent a material right?
Interpretive response: Yes. When codifying Topic 606, the FASB noted that
the concept of a significant and incremental discount in legacy US GAAP forms
the basis for the principle of a material right. It is this concept that differentiates
an option from a marketing or promotional offer. [ASU 2014-09.BC387]



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              284
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Therefore, we believe a material right is one that is both:
— significant to the customer; and
— incremental to the range of discounts typically given for those goods or
  services to that class of customer in the applicable geographical area or
  market.
To give rise to a material right, the discount offered does not need to be
incremental to the discount given for other goods or services in the contract.
Entities will need to exercise judgment to determine when a discount
is significant.



                   Question C460
                   How does an entity determine if a discount is
                   incremental to discounts offered to a similar class
                   of customers?
Interpretive response: The TRG generally agreed with a framework for how an
entity evaluates whether a discount on a customer option is incremental to
discounts given for goods or services to that class of customer.
The TRG agreed that the objective of the analysis is to determine whether the
pricing offered in the customer option would exist independently from the
current purchase. If the pricing is independent, it represents a marketing offer
and no material right exists. This analysis entails comparing the discount in the
current transaction to discounts provided to similar customers in transactions
that were not dependent on prior purchases – i.e. discounts not offered through
options embedded in similar contracts with other customers. The fact that
discounts given to similar customers in stand-alone transactions are similar to
the discount offered in the current contract indicates that the customer could
obtain the discount without entering into the current contract.
In contrast, the TRG generally agreed it would not be appropriate to compare
discounts offered through options embedded in similar contracts with other
customers. This comparison would not be relevant because it would not be
possible to discern whether the discount provided to the other customer was
independent of the current purchase. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 54]



                   Question C470
                   Is the evaluation of whether a customer option is a
                   material right only quantitative in nature?
Interpretive response: No. The TRG generally agreed that the assessment of
whether an option is a material right is both quantitative and qualitative in
nature. TRG members that supported this view believe that considering
qualitative factors is consistent with the notion that the existence of implied
performance obligations depends on whether a transaction creates reasonable
expectations of the customer. Therefore, a material right may exist even if it is
not quantitatively material. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 6]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              285
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Qualitative factors are particularly important when evaluating the expectations
of the customer. Examples of qualitative factors include, but are not limited to:
— availability and pricing of service alternatives;
— average customer life;
— whether a fee incents a customer to remain after the stated contract term
  ends; and
— whether the right accumulates.



                   Question C480
                   How does an entity determine whether a
                   prospective discount based on a customer
                   completing a specified volume of optional
                   purchases is a material right?
Interpretive response: Prospective volume discounts (or rebates) that are
earned once a customer has completed a specified volume of optional
purchases are evaluated for the presence of a material right and do not give rise
to variable consideration. For example, an entity might provide a customer with
the option to purchase software at $10 per seat license in the first year of an
agreement; but if the entity purchases at least 1,000 licenses, the price in the
second year decreases to $8. The purchases in the first year accumulate to give
the entity a right to make discounted purchases in the second year.
These prospective volume discounts (or rebates) provide the customer an
option to purchase additional goods at a discount. To evaluate if an option
represents a material right, the TRG agreed that an entity evaluates whether a
similar class of customer could receive the discount independent of a contract
with the entity (see Question C460). [TRG Agenda Paper No. 54]
To make that assessment, the entity looks at the range of prices in contracts
with customers that purchase similar volumes without a volume-based discount
provision and compares those prices against the discounts offered in the
current contract. The entity does not compare discounts given to other
customers under a similar volume-based discount provision.
However, if there is an accumulating feature, it is a strong indicator of a material
right. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 6]
Significant judgment will be required to determine whether discounts provided
to customers convey a material right. There are many variations of contracts
and variations in facts and circumstances that can affect the conclusion in each
fact pattern. Entities should thoroughly evaluate their specific facts and
circumstances.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              286
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question C490
                   Does an option to purchase goods or services for
                   less than stand-alone selling price without any
                   other purchases represent a material right?
Interpretive response: An entity may enter into an agreement that does not
obligate the customer to make any purchases but provides it with the right to
purchase the goods or services at a discounted price when it submits a
purchase order or statement of work. However, discounted prices on their own
does not necessarily mean that there is a material right. Similar to any other
customer option, entities need to determine if the discount is independent from
other purchases. If the discount in a future purchase order is independent from
a current contract, then a material right likely does not exist.
The TRG agreed with an example where the entity entered into a new
agreement with a customer at significantly discounted prices. In that example,
the customer did not pay for the option as it received the discounted prices
without making a purchase and each subsequent purchase did not affect the
pricing in future contracts. As a result, the TRG concluded that there was no
material right. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 54]
In contrast, if the right to the discount accumulates based on additional
purchases, there may be a material right. See Example C490.1.



                   Example C490.1
                   Discounted pricing not a material right
Software entity offered to supply software licenses at a rate of $100 per seat
license for two years, which is below its stand-alone selling price of $200 per
seat.
As a result of this offer, Customer and Software entity enter into an MSA. The
MSA does not specify a set quantity of software to be purchased but does set
the price per seat. As such, each time Customer and Software entity enter into
a specific purchase order (contract), it is priced using the price set out in
the MSA.
Although Software entity agrees to charge Customer a rate that is less than
what it would typically charge a similar customer, this arrangement does not
include a material right. This is because the rate per seat that Software entity
offers in each purchase order exists independently – the rate Software entity
would charge for the second purchase order would be the same regardless of
whether the first purchase order was placed.
The objective of the analysis is to determine whether the customer option
would exist independently of current purchases. In this example, the pricing set
in the MSA is independent of any past purchases – e.g. the terms were
negotiated separately. Moreover, the pricing provided to similar customers
would not be relevant because the discount already exists outside of an existing
contract – i.e. the subsequent purchase orders.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                              287
                                      C. Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract




Similarly, when Customer submitted its first purchase order, no material right
was present in that contract. That is because Customer already had the right to
the future discounts, so those rights existed independently from that purchase
order. This is different from discounts earned after the customer completes a
certain number of purchases, because in those scenarios the discount would
not be available until the customer completes the other purchases. [TRG Agenda
Paper No. 54]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                   Revenue for software and SaaS                     288
                                                                        D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




D.   Step 3: Determine the
     transaction price
     Questions and Examples
     Transaction price
     Q&A D10                   Should an entity present out-of-pocket costs and related
                               customer reimbursements on a gross basis (i.e. the customer
                               reimbursement as additional transaction price and the out-of-
                               pocket costs as costs of revenue or operating expenses) or a
                               net basis?
                               Example D10.1: Reimbursable and pass-through costs
                               (comprehensive example)
     Q&A D15                   What types of taxes or fees qualify for the policy election to be
                               excluded from the transaction price?
                               Example D15.1: Taxes collected from customer – gross
                               reporting
     Q&A D20                   Are nonrefundable upfront fees included in the transaction price
                               for a contract with a customer?
                               Example D20.1: Nonrefundable upfront fees for set-up
                               activities
     Variable consideration
     Q&A D30                   Can management use a method other than the ‘expected-
                               value’ or ‘most-likely-amount’ methods when estimating
                               variable consideration?
     Q&A D40                   What should a software entity consider in deciding whether it
                               has a sufficient number of similar contracts to use the expected
                               value method for estimating variable consideration?
     Q&A D50                   When estimating the expected value or when applying the
                               most likely amount method, does an entity need to consider all
                               possible outcomes?
     Q&A D60                   Is an entity required to use a single method to estimate the
                               transaction price consistently for all variable payment terms in
                               the same contract?
     Q&A D70                   Once an entity has elected to apply either the ‘most likely
                               amount’ method or the ‘expected value’ method for estimating
                               a variable consideration element, is the selected method
                               applied consistently throughout the course of the contract?
     Q&A D80                   Is an entity required to apply the same method of estimating
                               variable consideration to all similar variable fee terms within a
                               portfolio of contracts with customers?




     © 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
     member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     289
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Q&A D90                   Is using relevant information from a portfolio of similar
                          contracts to estimate variable consideration the same as
                          applying the portfolio approach practical expedient?
Q&A D100                  Does denomination in a currency other than the entity’s
                          functional currency mean the contract includes variable
                          consideration?
Q&A D110                  Does the transaction price in a contract with variable
                          consideration have to equal a possible outcome of the
                          contract?
                          Example D110.1: Transaction price is not a possible outcome
                          of the contract
Q&A D120                  Should variable consideration be included in the transaction
                          price when the entity believes it is unlikely to earn the variable
                          consideration?
Q&A D130                  How does a pattern of granting price concessions to customers
                          affect the transaction price?
                          Example D130.1: Pattern of granting price concessions and
                          estimating the transaction price
Q&A D140                  How do customer price protection (i.e. retroactive most-favored
                          nations) clauses affect the transaction price?
                          Example D140.1: Reseller arrangement and price protection
                          capped by the contract
Q&A D150                  Do extended payment terms create variable consideration in a
                          contract with a customer?
                          Example D150.1: Extended payment terms
Q&A D160                  How should prompt payment discounts be considered when
                          determining the transaction price of a contract?
Q&A D165                  Are liquidated damages or similar provisions variable
                          consideration?
Q&A D170                  How do service level agreements (SLAs) that could result in
                          refunds or credits to the customer affect the transaction price?
                          Example D170.1: Service level agreements
Q&A D175                  Does an entity first estimate variable consideration and then
                          apply the constraint to that estimate?
Q&A D176                  Is the unit of account for determining the constraint at the
                          contract or performance obligation level?
Q&A D180                  What factors influence the potential magnitude of a revenue
                          reversal that would result from a downward adjustment to an
                          entity’s estimate of variable consideration?
                          Example D180.1: Effect of various scenarios on the potential
                          magnitude of a revenue reversal




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     290
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Q&A D185                  How does an entity account for a change in estimate that
                          results in a significant revenue reversal?
Q&A D190                  Are subsequent sales or usage of licensed software variable
                          consideration or is each subsequent sale or usage an ‘optional
                          purchase’?
Q&A D200                  Is the contractual right to acquire additional users, seats or
                          copies of software a sales- or usage-based fee (i.e. variable
                          consideration) or a customer option to acquire additional
                          software licenses?
Q&A D210                  Are SaaS providers required to estimate transaction-based fees
                          that will be earned from customers in SaaS arrangements?
Q&A D220                  How do volume-based discounts and rebates affect the
                          estimation of the transaction price in SaaS arrangements?
The existence of a significant financing component in the
contract
                          Illustrative Example D1: Time value of money in a single
                          performance obligation arrangement
                          Illustrative Example D2: Time value of money in a multiple-
                          element arrangement
                          Illustrative Example D3: Determining whether an arrangement
                          has a significant financing component – Payment in advance
                          Illustrative Example D4: Determining whether an arrangement
                          has a significant financing component – Payment in arrears
Q&A D230                  Is the assessment of whether a financing component is
                          ‘significant’ to a contract a quantitative or qualitative
                          assessment?
Q&A D240                  Does an entity need to evaluate whether there is a significant
                          financing component in a long-term contract that transfers a
                          software license to the customer at a point in time for which
                          the consideration is a sales- or usage-based royalty?
Q&A D250                  Do extended payment terms result in a significant financing
                          component?
Q&A D260                  What is the accounting if an entity applies the 12-month
                          practical expedient not to account for a significant financing
                          component but subsequently changes its expectation that
                          customer payment and/or its performance will not occur within
                          12 months?
Q&A D270                  Is the transaction price of a software contract with a customer
                          with standard payment terms affected when the customer
                          obtains financing from a third party unrelated to the software
                          entity?
Q&A D280                  Is the transaction price of a software contract with a customer
                          with standard (i.e. non-extended) payment terms affected




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     291
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



                          where the software entity participates in the customer’s
                          financing?
Q&A D290                  Does a prepayment in advance of scheduled payments result in
                          a change to the transaction price for a contract that contains a
                          significant financing component?
Q&A D300                  Does a multi-year contract with annual prepayments qualify for
                          the practical expedient?
Q&A D310                  Does a contract with a payment that is due more than one year
                          before, or one year after, delivery of the related goods or
                          services qualify for the practical expedient?
                          Example D310.1: Application of the practical expedient
Q&A D320                  For contracts with multiple performance obligations, how
                          should payments be allocated to the performance obligations
                          for purposes of determining whether a significant financing
                          component exists or whether the practical expedient is
                          applicable?
                          Example D320.1: Allocation of customer payments
Q&A D330                  When determining whether a financing component is
                          significant to the contract, can an entity exclude the effect of
                          payments made within 12 months from the transfer of the
                          related goods or services?
                          Example D330.1: Calculation of the financing component
Q&A D335                  Can a significant financing component exist because of a
                          material right?
Q&A D340                  Under what circumstances, if any, would an entity use a
                          discount rate that is not entity- or customer-specific?
Q&A D341                  Is it appropriate to use a risk-free rate as the discount rate?
Q&A D342                  Is using an interest rate that is explicitly specified in the
                          contract appropriate?
Q&A D343                  How should an entity account for an explicitly stated interest
                          rate it charges a customer when the contract does not include
                          a significant financing component?
Q&A D344                  Could a contract with an implied interest rate of zero contain a
                          financing component?
Noncash consideration
Consideration payable to a customer
Q&A D345                  Are payments outside the contract with the customer or direct
                          distribution chain evaluated as consideration payable to a
                          customer?
                          Example D345.1: Payments to customers – payments outside
                          the distribution chain




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     292
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Q&A D346                  Are payments to a third party evaluated as consideration
                          payable to a customer?
                          Example D346.1: Customer incentive paid to a third party
                          Example D346.2: Commission paid to a third party
Q&A D347                  Does an entity include variable consideration in the transaction
                          price or follow the ‘later of’ guidance on consideration payable
                          to a customer?
                          Example D347.1: Payments to customers – Variable
                          consideration
Q&A D350                  Are payments to customers in the form of equity-based
                          instruments, instead of cash, considered ‘consideration payable
                          to a customer’?
Q&A D360                  How should an entity present consideration payable to a
                          customer that results in ‘negative revenue’?
Q&A D370                  How should an entity account for a nonrefundable upfront
                          payment to a customer or potential customer?
                          Example D370.1: Nonrefundable upfront payment to a
                          customer – SaaS
                          Example D370.2: Nonrefundable upfront payment to a
                          customer – New product
Q&A D380                  Are upfront payments to customers that are capitalized
                          classified as a contract asset?
Q&A D390                  What is the amortization period for a nonrefundable upfront
                          payment capitalized as an asset?
Q&A D400                  How should an entity test a nonrefundable upfront payment
                          that has been deferred for impairment?




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     293
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




        Step 1                    Step 2                     Step 3                    Step 4                    Step 5


                                Identify                  Determine                 Allocate the
     Identify the                                                                                              Recognize
                              performance                 transaction               transaction
       contract                                                                                                 revenue
                               obligations                   price                      price




This chapter is organized into five sections:
—     Transaction price
—     Variable consideration
—     The existence of a significant financing component in the contract
—     Noncash consideration
—     Consideration payable to a customer



Transaction price

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

32-1 When (or as) a performance obligation is satisfied, an entity shall
recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price (which excludes
estimates of variable consideration that are constrained in accordance with
paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through 32-13) that is allocated to that performance
obligation.
> Determining the Transaction Price
32-2 An entity shall consider the terms of the contract and its customary
business practices to determine the transaction price. The transaction price is
the amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in
exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer, excluding
amounts collected on behalf of third parties (for example, some sales taxes).
The consideration promised in a contract with a customer may include fixed
amounts, variable amounts, or both.
32-2A An entity may make an accounting policy election to exclude from the
measurement of the transaction price all taxes assessed by a governmental
authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-
producing transaction and collected by the entity from a customer (for
example, sales, use, value added, and some excise taxes). Taxes assessed on
an entity’s total gross receipts or imposed during the inventory procurement
process shall be excluded from the scope of the election. An entity that makes
this election shall exclude from the transaction price all taxes in the scope of
the election and shall comply with the applicable accounting policy guidance,
including the disclosure requirements in paragraphs 235-10-50-1 through 50-6.
32-3 The nature, timing, and amount of consideration promised by a customer
affect the estimate of the transaction price. When determining the transaction
price, an entity shall consider the effects of all of the following:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     294
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



a. Variable consideration (see paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through 32-10 and 606-
   10-32-14)
b. Constraining estimates of variable consideration (see paragraphs 606-10-
   32-11 through 32-13)
c. The existence of a significant financing component in the contract (see
   paragraphs 606-10-32-15 through 32-20)
d. Noncash consideration (see paragraphs 606-10-32-21 through 32-24)
e. Consideration payable to a customer (see paragraphs 606-10-32-25 through
   32-27).
32-4 For the purpose of determining the transaction price, an entity shall
assume that the goods or services will be transferred to the customer as
promised in accordance with the existing contract and that the contract will not
be cancelled, renewed, or modified.


The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which an entity expects
to be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services, excluding amounts
collected on behalf of third parties. To determine the transaction price, an entity
considers the terms of the contract; its customary business practices; and the
effects of variable consideration, the constraint on variable consideration, the
time value of money, noncash consideration, and consideration payable to
the customer.

                                                      Transaction price



     Variable consideration (and the constraint)
                                                                             Significant financing component
       An entity estimates the amount of variable
                                                                         For contracts with a significant financing
    consideration to which it expects to be entitled,
                                                                    component, an entity adjusts the promised amount
  giving consideration to the risk of revenue reversal
                                                                    of consideration to reflect the time value of money
                 in making the estimate


                 Noncash consideration
                                                                           Consideration payable to a customer
  Noncash consideration is measured at fair value, if
                                                                    An entity needs to determine whether consideration
   that can be reasonably estimated; if not, an entity
                                                                    payable to a customer represents a reduction of the
    uses the stand-alone selling price of the good or
                                                                     transaction price, a payment for a distinct good or
  service that was promised in exchange for noncash
                                                                            service, or a combination of the two
                     consideration



The transaction price does not include the effects of a customer’s credit risk,
except for contracts that contain a significant financing component (whereby
the discount rate is credit-adjusted). Rather, credit risk affects whether a
contract with a customer exists.
In general, the transaction price includes an entity’s estimate of variable
consideration. However, an entity will generally not be required to make such
an estimate for either:
— variable consideration arising from sales- or usage-based royalties promised
  in exchange for licenses of intellectual property – see Chapter F – Step 5:
  Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance
  obligation; or
— variable consideration that will be recognized in the period in which it is
  earned based on the variable consideration allocation guidance in



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     295
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



      paragraph 606-10-32-40 – See Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction
      price to the performance obligations in the contract.
When determining the transaction price, an entity assumes that the goods or
services will be transferred to the customer based on the terms of the existing
contract and does not take into consideration the possibility of a contract being
canceled, renewed or modified.
The transaction price includes only amounts (including variable consideration,
subject to the constraint on variable consideration) to which the entity has rights
under the present contract. For example, the transaction price does not include
estimates of consideration from (a) the future exercise of options for additional
goods or services or (b) future change orders until the customer exercises its
option or approves a change order because the entity does not have a present
right to that consideration. [ASU 2014-09.BC186]
The transaction price does not include amounts collected on behalf of third
parties (e.g. sales taxes collected by the entity for which it is not the primary
obligor to the taxing authority or sales taxes when the entity has elected the
US GAAP practical expedient to report sales taxes on a net basis – see the
following paragraph), or amounts collected by the entity on behalf of a principal
for goods or services provided to the customer by third parties when the entity
is acting as an agent with respect to those goods or services. Judgment will be
required in some cases to determine whether a payment from a customer is an
amount collected on behalf of a third party or an element of the transaction
price.
The FASB recognized the challenge this judgment can present with respect to
some forms of taxes. Consequently, Topic 606 permits entities to make an
accounting policy election to exclude all sales taxes and other similar taxes
(sales, use, value added and some excise taxes that are imposed on and
concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction and collected by the
entity from a customer) from the measurement of the transaction price. That is,
it permits the entity to present all collections from customers for these taxes on
a net basis, rather than having to assess whether the entity is acting as an
agent with respect to these taxes in each jurisdiction.



                  Question D10
                  Should an entity present out-of-pocket costs and
                  related customer reimbursements on a gross basis
                  (i.e. the customer reimbursement as additional
                  transaction price and the out-of-pocket costs as
                  costs of revenue or operating expenses) or a net
                  basis?
Interpretive response: It depends on whether the out-of-pocket costs are the
entity’s costs (i.e. because it is receiving the good or service from the third
party), or the customer’s costs (i.e. because the customer is the party receiving
the good or service from the third party) for which the entity is merely collecting
payment in its role as an agent to the customer or the third party.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     296
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Entities performing services for customers (including services in which the
entity’s role is that of an agent) often incur out-of-pocket costs as part of
delivering that service, such as travel and lodging. This is frequently the case
when software entities provide professional services (e.g. implementation
services and training) in connection with software licensing or software-as-a-
service (SaaS) arrangements. In these situations, the entity’s engineers or
consultants incur such costs in fulfilling the entity’s performance obligation to
provide the professional services to the customer. Customers frequently agree
to reimburse the out-of-pocket costs, often subject to restrictions such as
imposing a ceiling on total reimbursements or requiring the entity to follow
specific policies (e.g. the customer’s expense reimbursement policies) or use
the customer’s preferred airline or hotel vendor(s).
Regardless of whether a customer imposes restrictions or limits on its
reimbursement of out-of-pocket costs, typical out-of-pocket costs (e.g. travel,
meals, lodging) and the reimbursements thereof from the customer should be
presented on a gross basis. This is because the goods or services (e.g. the
transportation, the meal served or lodging provided to the entity’s employee)
giving rise to the out-of-pocket costs do not transfer a good or service to the
customer. Rather, the good or service is used or consumed by the entity in
fulfilling its performance obligation to the customer. Therefore, the out-of-
pocket cost is the entity’s cost rather than the customer’s. The costs, while
reimbursable, should be accounted for in the same manner as any other
fulfillment costs (see Chapter H – Contract costs). Meanwhile, the
reimbursements are variable consideration, subject to the same accounting
guidance as any other variable consideration.
Customer reimbursements of the entity’s out-of-pocket costs should be
distinguished from situations in which the entity is being reimbursed for
‘customer’ costs the entity has paid ‘on behalf of the customer’ to a third party.
For example, an agent may, as part of providing a service of arranging for a third
party to provide a specified good or service (e.g. SaaS or cloud-based storage),
remit payment to the third party (i.e. the principal) for the specified good or
service and then obtain reimbursement for that payment from the customer at
a later date. In that case, because the payment to the third party is payment for
the customer’s cost (rather than the entity’s cost), the reimbursement is not
part of the transaction price of the entity’s contract with its customer.
Consequently, the customer reimbursement is presented net of the payments
made to the third-party principal.



                  Example D10.1
                  Reimbursable and pass-through costs
                  (comprehensive example)
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide SaaS and certain
implementation services (e.g. some training and basic interfacing). Assume the
SaaS and the implementation services are distinct from each other (see
Question C280) and both are performance obligations satisfied over time (see
Questions F130 and F190). ABC also arranges for a third-party vendor to provide
data conversion and migration services to Customer that ABC does not provide
to any of its customers. Customer enters into a contract for those data



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     297
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



conversion and migration services directly with the third-party service vendor,
which designates ABC as an authorized agent of the third-party vendor. ABC
does not control the services before they are provided to Customer by the third
party and, therefore, is an agent with respect to the services.
Under the terms of the contract between ABC and Customer, Customer will
reimburse ABC for any out-of-pocket costs incurred in performing the
implementation services (e.g. ABC personnel travel-related costs to Customer’s
location or the printing and shipping of training-related materials). The contracts,
together, stipulate that Customer will remit payment for both the ABC-provided
SaaS and the third-party-provided data conversion and migration services to
ABC, who will then remit the agreed payment to the third-party vendor net of
the commission to which it is entitled under its contract with the third-party
vendor (i.e. ABC receives 5% of the contract price between Customer and the
third party).
The contract price for the SaaS and the implementation services is $100,000;
the contract price for the third-party services is $10,000 (5% of which is $500).
The stand-alone selling prices for the SaaS and the implementation services are
$85,000 and $25,000, respectively.
Third-party services
The payment made to ABC for the third-party data conversion and migration
services is not part of the transaction price of the contract between ABC and
Customer. Consistent with paragraph 606-10-32-2, that payment is an amount
collected on behalf of the third-party service vendor for services the third party
is providing (as a principal) to Customer. ABC further concludes that, in this
case, the $500 it retains from the payment as an agency fee is also not part of
the transaction price of its contract with Customer. In this case, because ABC
has a partnership agreement with the third-party partner, it concludes that the
third party is its customer for the agency service (i.e. it is providing the agency
service to the third party, not to Customer). Consequently, the $500 agency fee
is not a part of its contract with Customer, but rather part of a separate contract
with the third-party partner that is unrelated to Customer. ABC will recognize
the $500 agency fee when it has satisfied its performance obligation to arrange
for the third-party partner to provide the data conversion and migration services.
Out-of-pocket costs
The out-of-pocket costs (e.g. for travel and printed training materials) are
fulfillment costs of ABC to satisfy its performance obligation to provide
implementation services to Customer. Because the out-of-pocket costs are
ABC’s fulfillment costs incurred to satisfy its services performance obligation to
Customer, rather than Customer costs for third-party services being provided to
Customer, those costs are presented on a gross basis separate from the related
customer reimbursements.
The out-of-pocket fulfillment costs are expensed as incurred, consistent with
any other fulfillment costs ABC incurs related to the implementation services,
because when incurred they relate to a partially satisfied implementation
services performance obligation (see Question H230).
The reimbursements of the out-of-pocket costs represent variable consideration
such that the transaction price for the contract is variable. Based on its relevant
experience, ABC estimates, in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     298
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



32-9, that its out-of-pocket costs will be $2,000. ABC further concludes that it
does not need to ‘constrain’ that estimate of variable consideration. This is
because both (1) ABC has significant relevant experience that is driving its
estimate of the out-of-pocket costs and (2) any potential revenue reversal
against cumulative revenue recognized under the contract to that point that
might result is not significant given that the out-of-pocket cost amount will be
known relatively early in the performance of the implementation services (i.e.
ABC’s travel costs to get to Customer’s site or to print training-related materials
will be known before the services are performed) such that little revenue will
likely have been recognized under the contract at the point any substantive
‘true-up’ of the out-of-pocket cost estimate is required.
Next, ABC concludes that the variable consideration – which only results from
the out-of-pocket costs reimbursement – should be allocated entirely to the
implementation services performance obligation. In accordance with
paragraph 606-10-32-40 (see Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price
to the performance obligations in the contract), ABC concludes that (1) the out-
of-pocket costs to be incurred relate solely to ABC’s efforts to fulfill the
implementation services and (2) allocating this relatively minor amount entirely
to the implementation services is consistent with the overall transaction price
allocation objective in paragraph 606-10-32-28. ABC reaches the latter
conclusion on the basis that the allocation of the $2,000 entirely to the
implementation services results in a relative stand-alone selling price that is
consistent with the stand-alone selling price for the services and because an
entity providing the services separately (e.g. a consulting services provider not
providing the SaaS) would typically price those services either to include a
reimbursement provision similar to the one in the ABC/Customer contract or
include a fixed amount intended to recover similar out-of-pocket costs.
Consequently, ABC’s transaction price allocation for the contract with Customer
is as follows.
                                   Stand-
                                    alone                                                                            Total
                                   selling                                                                       allocated
                                     price             % of         Relative              Variable             transaction
                                    (SSP)              SSP              SSP          consideration                    price
 SaaS                            $85,000            77.3%            $77,273                     $       0           $77,273
 Implementation                    25,000           22.7%              22,727                     2,000                24,727
                               $110,000           100.0%           $100,000                      $2,000            $102,000

Assuming the SaaS, like the implementation services, is a performance
obligation satisfied over time, ABC will recognize the transaction price allocated
to each of the two performance obligations as the SaaS and the implementation
services are provided using an appropriate measure of progress for each (see
Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
performance obligation for further discussion about whether a SaaS
performance obligation is satisfied over time and appropriate measures of
progress). Because Topic 606 requires entities to use a single measure of
progress toward satisfaction of a performance obligation, it would not be
appropriate to apply one measure of progress to the $22,727 and another to the
$2,000 in anticipated customer out-of-pocket cost reimbursements. Therefore,
it would only be acceptable to recognize the reimbursements when the costs



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     299
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



are incurred if (1) ABC were using a cost-to-cost measure of progress for the
implementation services performance obligation as a whole and (2) the
incurrence of the out-of-pocket costs represents progress towards satisfaction
of the performance obligation (see paragraph 606-10-55-21).




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP (paragraph 605-45-45-23), reimbursements of out-of-
pocket expenses were required to be presented as revenue, gross from the
associated out-of-pocket costs, in all circumstances. In contrast, Topic 606 does
not include an explicit ‘rule’ in this regard; rather an entity considers whether it
is a principal or an agent with respect to the cost (i.e. whether the cost for
which it will receive payment from the customer is its cost or the customer’s
cost). However, while the guidance in Topic 606 does not have the same
explicit rule, and relies instead upon a principal versus agent concept, we do not
believe the changes to the guidance will result in any significant changes from
current practice with respect to how entities present most out-of-pocket costs,
including customer reimbursements thereof.
However, the timing of revenue recognition for customer reimbursements may
be earlier or later than under legacy US GAAP because of the guidance in Topic
606 about estimating variable consideration – i.e. under Topic 606, the
estimated customer reimbursements will be recognized, consistent with the
entity’s measure of progress for the related performance obligation, which
could be earlier or later than when the costs are incurred and when such
amounts were recognized under legacy US GAAP.



                   Question D15
                   What types of taxes or fees qualify for the policy
                   election to be excluded from the transaction price?

Interpretive response: Topic 606 permits an entity to elect to present all
collections from customers for certain taxes on a net basis, rather than having
to assess whether the entity is acting as principal or agent in each tax
jurisdiction. [606-10-32-2A]
Taxes qualify for the policy election if they are collected from customers and
remitted to governmental authorities that imposed the tax both on and
concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction between a seller and a
customer. These taxes may include, but are not limited to, sales, use, value-
added and some excise taxes as well as other taxes referred to as ‘fees’.
However, the policy election does not apply to tax schemes that are based on
gross receipts and taxes that are imposed during the inventory procurement
process. See questions 3.2.10 and 3.2.20 of KPMG Handbook, Inventory, for
further discussion of taxes paid upon acquisition of inventory. [606-10-32-2A]
Collecting the tax from the customer does not automatically designate the tax
as specific to revenue-producing activities. An entity evaluates the nature of the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     300
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



tax to determine if the tax is imposed on and concurrent with specific revenue-
producing transactions or if the tax is more akin to a gross receipts tax.
We believe the following are indicators that the tax is imposed on individual
transactions and would qualify for the Topic 606 policy election to be excluded
from the transaction price and presented on a net basis.
— The tax is imposed on individual sales transactions as identified in a law or
  regulation.
— The individual sales transaction is what creates the obligation on the entity
  to remit fees or taxes to the governmental authority.
— The tax is applied to specific types of transactions, on certain revenue
  streams or for certain products and services.
— Transactions or revenues with specified entities (e.g. not-for-profit entities)
  may be exempt.
The following are indicators that the tax is a gross receipts tax, and therefore
not eligible for the Topic 606 policy election.
— The tax is imposed on an accumulation of earnings or applied based on
  graduated rates.
— The tax allows specified deductions (other than specific revenue-related
  adjustments – e.g. billing credits, sales returns, uncollected accounts),
  credits for other taxes paid or apportionment factors.
— There are minimum thresholds to be exceeded before there is an obligation
  to file a return or remit taxes or fees.
— It includes types of income that are not the result of transactions with
  customers (e.g. nonoperating income).
— It interacts with other tax systems (e.g. the tax is the lesser or greater of a
  sales-based calculation or an income-based calculation).

None of the above factors is presumptive or determinative. Certain taxes
include characteristics of both sales taxes and gross receipts taxes and may
require significant judgment to determine their eligibility for the policy election.
All relevant facts and circumstances should be considered.



                   Example D15.1
                   Taxes collected from customer – gross reporting
ABC Corp. provides professional services to companies on cloud platforms. A
tax is implemented on companies who provide professional services on a digital
platform with annual platform revenues in excess of $500 million. The tax is 5%
on amounts in excess of $500 million and is due in February based on the
taxable revenue collected in the previous calendar year. ABC passes on this tax
to its customers and collects the tax each time the customer is invoiced.
ABC must evaluate whether the tax due is specific to revenue-producing
transactions or is more akin to a gross receipts tax on the business. This tax is
based on revenue generated over a certain dollar threshold and is taxed on
revenue for professional services provided by companies on a digital platform;
therefore, it is more in line with a gross receipts tax rather than a tax imposed
on and concurrent with specific revenue-producing transaction. As a result, ABC




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     301
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



concludes that the tax is a gross receipts tax that does not qualify for the policy
election to net costs against revenue.



                  Question D20
                  Are nonrefundable upfront fees included in the
                  transaction price for a contract with a customer?

Interpretive response: Yes. Some contracts include nonrefundable upfront
fees that are paid at or near contract inception – e.g. joining fees for health club
membership, activation fees for telecommunication contracts and set-up fees
for SaaS arrangements or hosting services.
Often a nonrefundable upfront fee relates to an activity that does not transfer a
good or service to the customer – e.g. set-up activities in a SaaS arrangement
(see Question C220) or an ‘administrative task’ such as setting up the
customer’s billing account. In other cases an upfront fee will relate to the
transfer of a good or service (e.g. a software license that is transferred at or
near contract inception or implementation services provided by the entity in a
software licensing or a SaaS arrangement).
Regardless of whether the nonrefundable upfront fee is identified in the
contract as relating to a specific good or service to be provided to the customer,
it is, nevertheless, a part of the transaction price of the contract that will be
allocated to the contract’s performance obligations. As discussed in
Question C410, the inclusion of a nonrefundable upfront fee in a contract may
indicate a ‘material right’ exists, which is an additional performance obligation of
the contract that will receive an allocation of the transaction price. Chapter E –
Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract
discusses the key considerations relative to allocating a transaction price that
includes a nonrefundable upfront fee.
The following figure summarizes the requirements in accounting for a
nonrefundable upfront fee.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     302
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                                                          Account for the promised good
       Nonrefundable fee
                                                          or service in the same manner
      related to a promised
                                                Yes       as any other promised good or
         good or service?
                                                                       service
                         No

    The fee is an advance
   payment for other future
      goods or services
                                                           Recognize amount allocated
                                                             to the material right over
                                                           period for which the upfront
     Does the fee create a
                                                              fee is important to the
        material right?                         Yes       customer’s decision to acquire
                                                          additional goods or to renew a
                         No                                           service

   Recognize the fee in the
     same manner as the
    other consideration for
    the promised goods or
   services in the contract




                   Example D20.1
                   Nonrefundable upfront fees for set-up activities
ABC Corp. is a SaaS provider of digital advertising services. ABC enters into a
statement of work (SOW) with Customer whereby Customer pays ABC a $10
million nonrefundable fee for activities to substantially increase Customer’s
ability to use ABC’s SaaS platform. The activities relate to ABC expanding
capacity at its own data center and increasing its employee headcount. The
contract does not contain a lease.
At the same time, ABC and Customer enter into a master service agreement
(MSA) that outlines the terms for future arrangements into which ABC and
Customer may enter, including required service levels. ABC would not be able
to serve Customer at the desired scale set forth in the MSA and Customer
would not contract with ABC for the data center build out if Customer was not
also contracting for the ongoing services in the MSA. The MSA is not a contract
under Topic 606 because it does not create enforceable rights and obligations
until a subsequent purchase order is consummated (see Question B30).
However, the SOW and MSA are evaluated together because they are entered
into at or near the same time and negotiated with a single commercial
objective; see Chapter B – Step 1: Identify the contract with customer for
considerations on when to combine contracts.

The activities in the SOW represent tasks required to fulfill future contracts with
Customer under the MSA. Therefore, ABC considers whether the activities in
the SOW transfer goods or services to the customer or are set-up activities.
ABC concludes that the activities are set-up activities because they relate to its
own assets (build out of the data center) and operations (hiring of employees)
and therefore those items are not transferred to Customer. Further, because




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     303
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



they relate to ABC’s own assets, the activities do not provide incremental
benefit to Customer beyond any future SaaS services under the MSA. As a
result, ABC also concludes that the fees are in effect nonrefundable fees
associated with future contracts under the MSA.
Because the MSA only represents options for additional services, ABC
concludes that the nonrefundable upfront fees and optional purchases in the
MSA convey a ‘material right’ consistent with Question C410. ABC will allocate
the upfront fee to the customer options to which it relates (see Question E390
and Example E390.1).




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Concluding whether a nonrefundable upfront fee represents a payment for a
promised good or service under Topic 606 may involve an analysis similar to
that undertaken for legacy US GAAP to determine whether the upfront fee is
payment for delivery of a good or a service that represents the culmination of a
separate earnings process. When performing the analysis under Topic 606, an
entity considers the guidance in Step 2 of the model, which is not necessarily
the same as legacy US GAAP.
Under the SEC guidance (SAB Topic 13) applicable to legacy US GAAP, an
upfront fee that is not a payment for delivery of a good or a service that
represents the culmination of a separate earnings process is deferred and
recognized over the expected period of performance, which can extend
beyond the initial contract period. In our experience, this has often resulted in
an entity recognizing nonrefundable upfront fees over the average customer
relationship period.
Under Topic 606, an entity assesses the upfront fee to determine whether it
provides the customer with a material right – and, if so, for how long. This
means that an entity no longer defaults to an average customer relationship
period, which may be driven by factors other than the payment of an upfront
fee. These factors may include the availability of viable alternatives, the entity’s
customer service, the inconvenience of changing service providers, or the
quality of the product or service offering.



Variable consideration

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Variable Consideration
32-5 If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, an
entity shall estimate the amount of consideration to which the entity will be
entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a
customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     304
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



32-6 An amount of consideration can vary because of discounts, rebates,
refunds, credits, price concessions, incentives, performance bonuses,
penalties, or other similar items. The promised consideration also can vary if an
entity’s entitlement to the consideration is contingent on the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of a future event. For example, an amount of consideration
would be variable if either a product was sold with a right of return or a fixed
amount is promised as a performance bonus on achievement of a specified
milestone.
32-7 The variability relating to the consideration promised by a customer may
be explicitly stated in the contract. In addition to the terms of the contract, the
promised consideration is variable if either of the following circumstances
exists:
a. The customer has a valid expectation arising from an entity’s customary
   business practices, published policies, or specific statements that the
   entity will accept an amount of consideration that is less than the price
   stated in the contract. That is, it is expected that the entity will offer a price
   concession. Depending on the jurisdiction, industry, or customer this offer
   may be referred to as a discount, rebate, refund, or credit.
b. Other facts and circumstances indicate that the entity’s intention, when
   entering into the contract with the customer, is to offer a price concession
   to the customer.
32-8 An entity shall estimate an amount of variable consideration by using
either of the following methods, depending on which method the entity
expects to better predict the amount of consideration to which it will be
entitled:
a. The expected value—The expected value is the sum of probability-
   weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. An
   expected value may be an appropriate estimate of the amount of variable
   consideration if an entity has a large number of contracts with similar
   characteristics.
b. The most likely amount—The most likely amount is the single most likely
   amount in a range of possible consideration amounts (that is, the single
   most likely outcome of the contract). The most likely amount may be an
   appropriate estimate of the amount of variable consideration if the contract
   has only two possible outcomes (for example, an entity either achieves a
   performance bonus or does not).
32-9 An entity shall apply one method consistently throughout the contract
when estimating the effect of an uncertainty on an amount of variable
consideration to which the entity will be entitled. In addition, an entity shall
consider all the information (historical, current, and forecast) that is reasonably
available to the entity and shall identify a reasonable number of possible
consideration amounts. The information that an entity uses to estimate the
amount of variable consideration typically would be similar to the information
that the entity’s management uses during the bid-and-proposal process and in
establishing prices for promised goods or services.
• • > Refund Liabilities
32-10 An entity shall recognize a refund liability if the entity receives
consideration from a customer and expects to refund some or all of that




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     305
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



consideration to the customer. A refund liability is measured at the amount of
consideration received (or receivable) for which the entity does not expect to
be entitled (that is, amounts not included in the transaction price). The refund
liability (and corresponding change in the transaction price and, therefore, the
contract liability) shall be updated at the end of each reporting period for
changes in circumstances. To account for a refund liability relating to a sale
with a right of return, an entity shall apply the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-
55-22 through 55-29.



Types of variable consideration
The amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled can vary
due to the existence of one or more of the following:
—     discounts
—     rebates
—     refunds
—     credits
—     price concessions
—     incentives
—     performance bonuses or penalties.
The promised consideration also can vary if the entity’s entitlement to the
consideration is contingent on the occurrence or nonoccurrence of a future
event, even if the contract price appears to be fixed. For example, the amount
of consideration promised in a fixed-price SaaS contract would be variable if the
contract includes service level guarantees that could result in the entity
providing credits or refunds to the customer as a penalty for not meeting the
specified service levels (see Question D170).
Variability in the contract consideration may be explicit or implicit, arising from
customary business practices, published policies or specific statements, or any
other facts and circumstances that would create a valid expectation by the
customer. For example, explicit price concessions may be granted to enhance a
customer relationship to encourage future sales to that customer or as part of
an overall strategy to develop the customer relationship, while implicit price
concessions occur when the entity’s customary business practices, published
policies or specific statements, or other relevant facts and circumstances
indicate that the entity may accept a lower price than that stated in the contract.


Accounting for variable consideration
An entity estimates an amount of variable consideration by using one of the
following methods, applied consistently to similar contracts, depending on
which method the entity expects to better predict the amount of consideration
to which the entity will be entitled (i.e. it is not a ‘free choice’).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     306
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




  Expected value                     The entity considers the probability-weighted amounts for a
                                     range of possible consideration outcomes. This may be an
                                     appropriate estimate of the amount of variable consideration if
                                     an entity has a large number of contracts with similar
                                     characteristics and may be more appropriate when an entity
                                     has a large number of possible outcomes.
  Most likely amount                 The entity considers the single most likely amount from a
                                     range of possible consideration outcomes. This may be an
                                     appropriate estimate of the amount of variable consideration if
                                     the contract has only two (or perhaps a few)
                                     possible outcomes (e.g. an entity either will achieve a
                                     performance bonus or not).


In general, it is important for an entity to have a sufficiently large number of
similar transactions to conclude that the expected value method is more
appropriate than the most likely amount method. Judgment is required to
determine whether:
— the transactions are sufficiently similar;
— the transactions from which the expected value is derived are expected to
  be consistent with the current contract; and
— the volume of similar contracts is sufficient to develop an expected value.
An entity considers all information available when making its estimate of
variable consideration and updates the estimate at each reporting date.
An entity recognizes a refund liability for consideration received or receivable if
it expects to refund some or all of the consideration to the customer. Topic 606
applies the mechanics of estimating variable consideration in a variety of
scenarios, some of which include fixed consideration – e.g. sales with a right of
return and customers’ unexercised rights (breakage).



                  Question D30
                  Can management use a method other than the
                  ‘expected-value’ or ‘most-likely-amount’ methods
                  when estimating variable consideration?

Interpretive response: No. The FASB considered, and ultimately rejected
allowing management to have a free choice to select a method to estimate
variable consideration. Instead, it developed a framework for estimating variable
consideration, requiring that an entity use either the expected-value method or
the most-likely-amount method, depending on which is a better predictor given
the specific facts and circumstances. The FASB thought that such a framework
would ensure rigor in the estimation process. The FASB concluded that without
such a framework the measurement of revenue might not be understandable to
users and might lack comparability between entities. [ASU 2014-09.BC198]
When making disclosures about significant judgments made in applying Topic
606, an entity should ensure its disclosures about methods used to estimate
variable consideration are consistent with the required framework described
above. See section 15.8 of KPMG Handbook, Revenue Recognition, for




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     307
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



guidance about disclosing an entity’s significant judgments in applying Topic
606.



                  Question D40
                  What should a software entity consider in deciding
                  whether it has a sufficient number of similar
                  contracts to use the expected value method for
                  estimating variable consideration?
Interpretive response: In some cases, a software entity’s ability to use the
expected value method will be clear. For example, SaaS providers that have
substantially similar contracts with all customers accessing its hosted software
in a multi-tenant environment will generally have a sufficient portfolio of data
from which to use an expected value method to estimating variable
consideration resulting from items such as service level guarantees. Another
example could be a software licensing entity that, as its standard practice,
enters into three-year licenses for the same products and services with all (or
most) of its customers.
However, an entity’s software contracts are also often quite customer-specific.
For example, for some software entities, customers rarely obtain licenses to
the same mix of software products, or even similar product mixes may include
very different licenses (e.g. perpetual versus term licenses or licenses that
include different restrictions on use). For other entities, their customers acquire
different software-related services – e.g. one customer may request
customization, while another does not but contracts for a more extensive suite
of implementation services, and a third requests that the entity host the
licensed software.
Use of the expected value method does not necessarily require homogenous
customer contracts; rather, it merely requires that there be common
characteristics relevant to the estimation of the variable consideration. For
example, even if a software entity never licenses the same mix of software
products to any two customers or has a wide variety of license terms, its
implementation or hosting services provided for its different software products
and licenses may be substantially similar such that it can use the expected
value method to estimate the likelihood of earning performance bonuses or
incurring penalties related to those services. Similarly, even if the entity’s
customers enter into widely varied arrangements for different mixes of
software licenses and services, the entity’s hosting services may be generally
consistent such that, even though the software being hosted may differ
substantially between customers, the portfolio of customer contracts that
include hosting services provide relevant, predictive evidence about whether
the entity will be required to provide service level credits or refunds to
customers.
There are various attributes of a software entity’s customer contract portfolio
that may provide similarities relevant to different types of variable consideration.
Some examples of attributes around which an entity may be able to develop a
portfolio of data (even if the contracts are not substantially similar overall), and
relevance to variable consideration, include (not exhaustive):



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     308
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



— Perpetual versus term licensing – it may be that customers under term
  licenses are more likely to be granted concessions (which are variable
  consideration – see Question D130) to induce renewal than customers with
  perpetual licenses.
— Type or class of customer – it may be that larger customers are granted
  concessions, but smaller customers are not; that larger customers have
  more stringent performance bonus/penalty provisions in their contracts than
  smaller customers; or that reseller customers (as compared to end-user
  customers) are more likely to return software licenses.
— Payment terms – it may be that customers with extended payment terms
  are more likely to be granted concessions (see Question D150).
— Types of products or services – it may be that the software entity’s
  performance record on implementing or customizing software successfully
  within a predetermined timeframe differs depending on the nature of those
  services or the software products being implemented or customized.



                  Question D50
                  When estimating the expected value or when
                  applying the most likely amount method, does an
                  entity need to consider all possible outcomes?
Interpretive response: No. Although in theory, an entity using the most likely
amount method considers all the possible outcomes to identify the most likely
one, in practice, there is no need to quantify the less probable outcomes.
[ASU 2014-09.BC201]

Similarly, in practice, estimating the expected value using a probability-weighted
method does not require an entity to explicitly quantify probabilities for all
possible outcomes using complex models and techniques. Using a smaller
number of discrete outcomes might provide a reasonable estimate of the
distribution of possible outcomes.
Regardless of the method used, an entity should consider all the information
(historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available when making
its estimate.



                  Question D60
                  Is an entity required to use a single method to
                  estimate the transaction price consistently for all
                  variable payment terms in the same contract?
Interpretive response: No. Using a different method for different payment
streams within the same contract is permissible, provided the methods are
consistently applied for the duration of the contract. For example, it would be
permissible to apply the most likely amount method to a performance bonus
related to implementation services provided under the contract, while using the
expected value method to estimate the variable consideration for a right of



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     309
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



return on the software licenses or in estimating service level credits (see
Question D170) in a SaaS arrangement.



                  Question D70
                  Once an entity has elected to apply either the ‘most
                  likely amount’ method or the ‘expected value’
                  method for estimating a variable consideration
                  element, is the selected method applied
                  consistently throughout the course of the contract?
Interpretive response: Yes. Paragraph 606-10-32-9 states that “when
estimating the transaction price, an entity shall apply one method consistently
throughout the contract.” Therefore, the method selected for a variable
consideration element (e.g. in estimating the performance bonus or the right of
return used as an example in Question D60) is consistently applied to that
individual element for the duration of the contract.



                  Question D80
                  Is an entity required to apply the same method of
                  estimating variable consideration to all similar
                  variable fee terms within a portfolio of contracts
                  with customers?
Interpretive response: We would generally expect the same method of
estimating a variable transaction price to be applied to similar variable fee terms
across an entity’s portfolio of contracts absent a change in circumstances or
business practices. However, the objective for each contract is to develop an
estimate of the amount that is most predictive of amount to which the entity
will be entitled to and therefore there may be exceptions due to the specific
circumstances of a contract with a particular customer.



                  Question D90
                  Is using relevant information from a portfolio of
                  similar contracts to estimate variable consideration
                  the same as applying the portfolio approach
                  practical expedient?
Interpretive response: No. This question was discussed by the TRG at the
March 2015 meeting. The TRG members agreed with the views of the FASB
and IASB staffs that using a portfolio of data to develop estimates required to
apply the revenue model in Topic 606, including estimates of variable
consideration using the expected value method, is not the same as applying the
portfolio approach practical expedient. This means that there is no requirement
for entities using a portfolio of data of similar contracts to apply the expected



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     310
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



value method to evaluate whether the results of using that portfolio of data to
develop the estimate would differ materially from developing an estimate based
on contract-specific data. Question D110 highlights that an entity’s estimate
resulting from an expected-value method estimate does not have to equal a
possible outcome of the contract.



                  Question D100
                  Does denomination in a currency other than the
                  entity’s functional currency mean the contract
                  includes variable consideration?
Interpretive response: No. Entities may enter into contracts denominated in a
foreign currency. Although the contract may state a fixed price in that foreign
currency, the amount received by the entity in its functional currency will vary
based on the changes in the exchange rate in effect between the date the
contract is entered into and when the payment is received.
Foreign currency is not ‘noncash consideration’; it is still ‘cash’. Paragraph 830-
230-45-1 supports this in stating that the statement of cash flows “reports the
effect of exchange rate changes on cash balances held in foreign currencies as
a separate part of the reconciliation of the change in cash and cash equivalents
during the period.” The measurement of that foreign-denominated cash
quantifies the amount to record for accounting purposes, as described in
paragraph 830-10-55-1.
Therefore, contracts denominated in a currency other than the entity’s
functional currency should be measured into the entity’s functional currency
using the foreign exchange rate in effect on the date of either transfer of the
goods or services or payment in advance by the customer, whichever is first
(see Topic 830, Foreign Currency Matters). Changes in the foreign exchange
rate between contract inception and the date of either transfer of the goods or
services or payment in advance by the customer, whichever is first, would
therefore affect the amount of revenue recognized. See section 3 of KPMG
Handbook, Foreign currency, for further discussion of foreign currency
transactions. [830-20-30-1]


Constraint on variable consideration

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Constraining Estimates of Variable Consideration
32-11 An entity shall include in the transaction price some or all of an amount
of variable consideration estimated in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-8
only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of
cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated
with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     311
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



32-12 In assessing whether it is probable that a significant reversal in the
amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur once the uncertainty
related to the variable consideration is subsequently resolved, an entity shall
consider both the likelihood and the magnitude of the revenue reversal. Factors
that could increase the likelihood or the magnitude of a revenue reversal
include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
a. The amount of consideration is highly susceptible to factors outside the
   entity’s influence. Those factors may include volatility in a market, the
   judgment or actions of third parties, weather conditions, and a high risk of
   obsolescence of the promised good or service.
b. The uncertainty about the amount of consideration is not expected to be
   resolved for a long period of time.
c. The entity’s experience (or other evidence) with similar types of contracts
   is limited, or that experience (or other evidence) has limited predictive
   value.
d. The entity has a practice of either offering a broad range of price
   concessions or changing the payment terms and conditions of similar
   contracts in similar circumstances.
The contract has a large number and broad range of possible consideration
amounts.
32-13 An entity shall apply paragraph 606-10-55-65 to account for consideration
in the form of a sales-based or usage-based royalty that is promised in
exchange for a license of intellectual property.
• • > Example 22—Right of Return
55-202 An entity enters into 100 contracts with customers. Each contract
includes the sale of 1 product for $100 (100 total products × $100 = $10,000
total consideration). Cash is received when control of a product transfers. The
entity’s customary business practice is to allow a customer to return any
unused product within 30 days and receive a full refund. The entity’s cost of
each product is $60.
55-203 The entity applies the guidance in this Topic to the portfolio of
100 contracts because it reasonably expects that, in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-10-4, the effects on the financial statements from applying
this guidance to the portfolio would not differ materially from applying the
guidance to the individual contracts within the portfolio.
55-204 Because the contract allows a customer to return the products, the
consideration received from the customer is variable. To estimate the variable
consideration to which the entity will be entitled, the entity decides to use the
expected value method (see paragraph 606-10-32-8(a)) because it is the
method that the entity expects to better predict the amount of consideration to
which it will be entitled. Using the expected value method, the entity
estimates that 97 products will not be returned.
55-205 The entity also considers the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-11
through 32-13 on constraining estimates of variable consideration to determine
whether the estimated amount of variable consideration of $9,700 ($100 × 97
products not expected to be returned) can be included in the transaction price.
The entity considers the factors in paragraph 606-10-32-12 and determines that
although the returns are outside the entity’s influence, it has significant



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     312
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



experience in estimating returns for this product and customer class. In
addition, the uncertainty will be resolved within a short time frame (that is, the
30-day return period). Thus, the entity concludes that it is probable that a
significant reversal in the cumulative amount of revenue recognized (that is,
$9,700) will not occur as the uncertainty is resolved (that is, over the return
period).
55-206 The entity estimates that the costs of recovering the products will be
immaterial and expects that the returned products can be resold at a profit.
55-207 Upon transfer of control of the 100 products, the entity does not
recognize revenue for the 3 products that it expects to be returned.
Consequently, in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-32-10 and 606-10-55-23,
the entity recognizes the following:
     Cash                         $10,000 ($100 × 100 products transferred)
     Revenue                      $9,700 ($100 × 97 products not expected to be returned)
     Refund liabilities $300 ($100 refund × 3 products expected to be returned)
     Cost of sale                 $5,820 ($60 × 97 products not expected to returned)
     Asset                        $180 ($60 × 3 products for its right to recover products
                                  form customers on settling the refund liability)
     Inventory                    $6,000 ($60 × 100 products)
• • > Example 23—Price Concessions
55-208 An entity enters into a contract with a customer, a distributor, on
December 1, 20X7. The entity transfers 1,000 products at contract inception
for a price stated in the contract of $100 per product (total consideration is
$100,000). Payment from the customer is due when the customer sells the
products to the end customers. The entity’s customer generally sells the
products within 90 days of obtaining them. Control of the products transfers to
the customer on December 1, 20X7.
55-209 On the basis of its past practices and to maintain its relationship with
the customer, the entity anticipates granting a price concession to its customer
because this will enable the customer to discount the product and thereby
move the product through the distribution chain. Consequently, the
consideration in the contract is variable.
• • • > Case A—Estimate of Variable Consideration Is Not Constrained
55-210 The entity has significant experience selling this and similar products.
The observable data indicate that historically the entity grants a price
concession of approximately 20 percent of the sales price for these products.
Current market information suggests that a 20 percent reduction in price will
be sufficient to move the products through the distribution chain. The entity
has not granted a price concession significantly greater than 20 percent in
many years.
55-211 To estimate the variable consideration to which the entity will be
entitled, the entity decides to use the expected value method (see
paragraph 606-10-32-8(a)) because it is the method that the entity expects to
better predict the amount of consideration to which it will be entitled. Using




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     313
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



the expected value method, the entity estimates the transaction price to be
$80,000 ($80 × 1,000 products).
55-212 The entity also considers the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-11
through 32-13 on constraining estimates of variable consideration to determine
whether the estimated amount of variable consideration of $80,000 can be
included in the transaction price. The entity considers the factors in
paragraph 606-10-32-12 and determines that it has significant previous
experience with this product and current market information that supports its
estimate. In addition, despite some uncertainty resulting from factors outside
its influence, based on its current market estimates, the entity expects the
price to be resolved within a short time frame. Thus, the entity concludes that
it is probable that a significant reversal in the cumulative amount of revenue
recognized (that is, $80,000) will not occur when the uncertainty is resolved
(that is, when the total amount of price concessions is determined).
Consequently, the entity recognizes $80,000 as revenue when the products
are transferred on December 1, 20X7.
• • • > Case B—Estimate of Variable Consideration Is Constrained
55-213 The entity has experience selling similar products. However, the
entity’s products have a high risk of obsolescence, and the entity is
experiencing high volatility in the pricing of its products. The observable data
indicate that historically the entity grants a broad range of price concessions
ranging from 20 to 60 percent of the sales price for similar products. Current
market information also suggests that a 15 to 50 percent reduction in price
may be necessary to move the products through the distribution chain.
55-214 To estimate the variable consideration to which the entity will be
entitled, the entity decides to use the expected value method (see
paragraph 606-10-32-8(a)) because it is the method that the entity expects to
better predict the amount of consideration to which it will be entitled. Using
the expected value method, the entity estimates that a discount of 40 percent
will be provided and, therefore, the estimate of the variable consideration is
$60,000 ($60 × 1,000 products).
55-215 The entity also considers the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-11
through 32-13 on constraining estimates of variable consideration to determine
whether some or all of the estimated amount of variable consideration of
$60,000 can be included in the transaction price. The entity considers the
factors in paragraph 606-10-32-12 and observes that the amount of
consideration is highly susceptible to factors outside the entity’s influence (that
is, risk of obsolescence) and it is likely that the entity may be required to
provide a broad range of price concessions to move the products through the
distribution chain. Consequently, the entity cannot include its estimate of
$60,000 (that is, a discount of 40 percent) in the transaction price because it
cannot conclude that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of
cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. Although the entity’s historical
price concessions have ranged from 20 to 60 percent, market information
currently suggests that a price concession of 15 to 50 percent will be
necessary. The entity’s actual results have been consistent with then-current
market information in previous, similar transactions. Consequently, the entity
concludes that it is probable that a significant reversal in the cumulative
amount of revenue recognized will not occur if the entity includes $50,000 in




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     314
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



the transaction price ($100 sales price and a 50 percent price concession) and,
therefore, recognizes revenue at that amount. Therefore, the entity recognizes
revenue of $50,000 when the products are transferred and reassesses the
estimates of the transaction price at each reporting date until the uncertainty is
resolved in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-14.
• • > Example 24—Volume Discount Incentive
55-216 An entity enters into a contract with a customer on January 1, 20X8, to
sell Product A for $100 per unit. If the customer purchases more than 1,000
units of Product A in a calendar year, the contract specifies that the price per
unit is retrospectively reduced to $90 per unit. Consequently, the consideration
in the contract is variable.
55-217 For the first quarter ended March 31, 20X8, the entity sells 75 units of
Product A to the customer. The entity estimates that the customer’s
purchases will not exceed the 1,000-unit threshold required for the volume
discount in the calendar year.
55-218 The entity considers the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through
32-13 on constraining estimates of variable consideration, including the factors
in paragraph 606-10-32-12. The entity determines that it has significant
experience with this product and with the purchasing pattern of the entity.
Thus, the entity concludes that it is probable that a significant reversal in the
cumulative amount of revenue recognized (that is, $100 per unit) will not occur
when the uncertainty is resolved (that is, when the total amount of purchases
is known). Consequently, the entity recognizes revenue of $7,500 (75 units ×
$100 per unit) for the quarter ended March 31, 20X8.
55-219 In May 20X8, the entity’s customer acquires another company and
in the second quarter ended June 30, 20X8, the entity sells an additional
500 units of Product A to the customer. In light of the new fact, the entity
estimates that the customer’s purchases will exceed the 1,000-unit threshold
for the calendar year and, therefore, it will be required to retrospectively reduce
the price per unit to $90.
55-220 Consequently, the entity recognizes revenue of $44,250 for the quarter
ended June 30, 20X8. That amount is calculated from $45,000 for the sale of
500 units (500 units × $90 per unit) less the change in transaction price of $750
(75 units × $10 price reduction) for the reduction of revenue relating to units
sold for the quarter ended March 31, 20X8 (see paragraphs 606-10-32-42
through 32-43).
• • > Example 25—Management Fees Subject to the Constraint
55-221 On January 1, 20X8, an entity enters into a contract with a client to
provide asset management services for five years. The entity receives a
2 percent quarterly management fee based on the client’s assets under
management at the end of each quarter. In addition, the entity receives a
performance-based incentive fee of 20 percent of the fund’s return in excess
of the return of an observable market index over the 5-year period.
Consequently, both the management fee and the performance fee in the
contract are variable consideration.
55-222 The entity accounts for the services as a single performance obligation
in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-14(b), because it is providing a series




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     315
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



of distinct services that are substantially the same and have the same pattern
of transfer (the services transfer to the customer over time and use the same
method to measure progress—that is, a time-based measure of progress).
55-223 At contract inception, the entity considers the guidance in
paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through 32-9 on estimating variable consideration and
the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through 32-13 on constraining
estimates of variable consideration, including the factors in paragraph 606-10-
32-12. The entity observes that the promised consideration is dependent on
the market and, thus, is highly susceptible to factors outside the entity’s
influence. In addition, the incentive fee has a large number and a broad range
of possible consideration amounts. The entity also observes that although it
has experience with similar contracts, that experience is of little predictive
value in determining the future performance of the market. Therefore, at
contract inception, the entity cannot conclude that it is probable that a
significant reversal in the cumulative amount of revenue recognized would not
occur if the entity included its estimate of the management fee or the incentive
fee in the transaction price.
55-224 At each reporting date, the entity updates its estimate of the
transaction price. Consequently, at the end of each quarter, the entity
concludes that it can include in the transaction price the actual amount of the
quarterly management fee because the uncertainty is resolved. However, the
entity concludes that it cannot include its estimate of the incentive fee in the
transaction price at those dates. This is because there has not been a change
in its assessment from contract inception—the variability of the fee based on
the market index indicates that the entity cannot conclude that it is probable
that a significant reversal in the cumulative amount of revenue recognized
would not occur if the entity included its estimate of the incentive fee in the
transaction price. At March 31, 20X8, the client’s assets under management
are $100 million. Therefore, the resulting quarterly management fee and the
transaction price is $2 million.
55-225 At the end of each quarter, the entity allocates the quarterly
management fee to the distinct services provided during the quarter in
accordance with paragraphs 606-10-32-39(b) and 606-10-32-40. This is because
the fee relates specifically to the entity’s efforts to transfer the services for
that quarter, which are distinct from the services provided in other quarters,
and the resulting allocation will be consistent with the allocation objective in
paragraph 606-10-32-28. Consequently, the entity recognizes $2 million as
revenue for the quarter ended March 31, 20X8.


The objective of the constraint on variable consideration is to reduce the risk
that an entity recognizes a significant revenue reversal (a downward adjustment
to revenue) from subsequent changes in the estimate of the amount of variable
consideration to which the entity is expected to be entitled. As described in the
Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC207), the constraint introduces a
downward bias into estimates, requiring entities to exercise prudence before
they recognize revenue – i.e. they are required to make a non-neutral estimate.
This exception to the revenue recognition model, and to the Boards’ respective
conceptual frameworks’ requirement to make neutral estimates, reflects the
particular sensitivity with which revenue reversals are viewed by many users
and regulators.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     316
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Therefore, in accordance with the objective of the constraint, an entity includes
an estimated amount of variable consideration in the transaction price only if it is
probable that a subsequent change in the estimate of the amount of variable
consideration would not result in a significant revenue reversal. A significant
revenue reversal would occur if a subsequent change in the estimate of the
variable consideration would result in a significant downward adjustment on the
amount of cumulative revenue recognized from that contract when the change in
estimate occurs. The term ‘probable’ is used in the same way as it is in
Topic 450, Contingencies – i.e. “the future event or events are likely to occur.”
Because probable is not as high of a threshold as, for example, ‘virtually certain’,
even though the intent of the constraint is to prevent significant downward
adjustments to previously recognized revenue, such adjustments may occur.
The entity would meet the objective of the constraint if it has sufficient
experience or evidence to support that an amount of variable consideration, if
included in the transaction price and recognized as revenue, does not risk a
significant revenue reversal. Importantly, not having sufficient experience or
evidence to support that including the entire amount of variable consideration in
the transaction price does not have a risk of resulting in a significant revenue
reversal does not mean the transaction price should not include some portion of
the variable consideration. If an entity expects that including some, but not all,
of the estimated amount of variable consideration (i.e. a minimum amount) in
the transaction price would not result in a significant revenue reversal, the
entity includes that amount (and subsequent changes to that amount) in the
estimate of the transaction price. This means that, in many cases, even if there
is significant uncertainty about variable consideration, the amount of variable
consideration included in the transaction price will be greater than zero.
The entity’s assessment of whether its experience or other evidence is
sufficient to support its assessment is qualitative and should take into account
all the relevant facts and circumstances associated with both:
— the likelihood of a downward adjustment in the estimate of variable
  consideration (e.g. the risk of such an adjustment arising from an uncertain
  future event); and
— the magnitude of the reversal if that uncertain event were to occur or fail to
  occur. An entity assesses the potential magnitude of a significant revenue
  reversal relative to the cumulative revenue recognized to-date under the
  contract – i.e. for both variable and fixed consideration, rather than on a
  reversal of only the variable consideration. See Question D176 on the unit
  of account for performing this analysis.
Factors that indicate that including an estimate of variable consideration in the
transaction price could result in a significant revenue reversal include, but are
not limited to, the following.
— The amount of consideration is highly susceptible to factors outside the
  entity‘s influence. Those factors include volatility in a market, the judgment
  or actions of third parties, weather conditions, and a high risk of
  obsolescence of the promised good or service.
— The uncertainty about the amount of consideration is not expected to be
  resolved for a long period of time.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     317
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



— The entity‘s experience (or other evidence) with similar types of contracts is
  limited or that experience (or other evidence) has limited predictive value.
— The entity has a practice of either offering a broad range of price
  concessions or changing the payment terms and conditions of similar
  contracts in similar circumstances.
— The contract has a large number and broad range of possible consideration
  amounts.
If the risk of a downward adjustment in the estimate of variable consideration is
low or the potential magnitude of the revenue reversal that would result from
that downward adjustment is minor, then the constraint does not affect the
estimated amount of variable consideration.
An entity does not consider collectibility of the consideration (i.e. customer
credit risk) when evaluating either its estimate of variable consideration or the
applicability of the constraint. The effect of credit risk is addressed separately in
Chapter B – Step 1: Identify a contract with a customer. Step 1 of the Model
includes an explicit collectibility threshold as a criterion to conclude that a
contract exists within the Topic 606 revenue model.
Even if an entity constrains variable consideration in its determination of the
transaction price, it still recognizes all of the related costs to fulfill the promised
good or service when control thereof is transferred to the customer. This may
result in an upfront loss until the constrained variable consideration (or a portion
thereof) becomes unconstrained.


Reassessment of variable consideration

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Reassessment of Variable Consideration
32-14 At the end of each reporting period, an entity shall update the estimated
transaction price (including updating its assessment of whether an estimate of
variable consideration is constrained) to represent faithfully the circumstances
present at the end of the reporting period and the changes in circumstances
during the reporting period. The entity shall account for changes in the
transaction price in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-32-42 through 32-45.


An entity’s estimate of variable consideration will frequently change after
contract inception. For example, uncertainties will be resolved or new
information will arise with respect to remaining uncertainties such that the
entity must revise its expectations about the amount of variable consideration
to which it expects to be entitled. To account for conditions that exist at each
reporting date (and changes in conditions during the reporting period), an entity
updates its estimates of variable consideration and amounts of that variable
consideration that should be constrained throughout the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     318
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Question D110
                  Does the transaction price in a contract with
                  variable consideration have to equal a possible
                  outcome of the contract?
Interpretive response: No. Some variable consideration arrangements have a
limited number of possible outcomes. For example, an arrangement under
which an entity provides services may include incentives or penalties for good
or poor performance that only have a limited number of possible outcomes.
Consider a scenario where the entity stands to earn potential bonuses of $300,
$200 or $100 if a project is completed before specified dates and penalties of
$100, $200 and $300 if the project is completed after specified dates. On-time
performance results in the entity earning $500. In this scenario the only
possible outcomes for the transaction price are $200, $300, $400, $500, $600,
$700 and $800. This is a scenario that may occur in some software or SaaS
development projects or large-scale implementation projects.
In scenarios such as this, entities having a sufficient volume of similar
arrangements (see Question D40) may determine that the expected value
method is the most appropriate method to estimate the variable consideration.
At the July 2015 TRG meeting, it was discussed whether the transaction price
must equal a possible outcome of the contract – e.g. in the scenario above,
must the estimated transaction price be one of those possible outcomes. The
FASB and IASB staffs expressed the view, with which most TRG members
agreed, that when using the expected value estimation method for variable
consideration, the estimated transaction price does not need to be an amount
that is a possible outcome for an individual contract – i.e. in the scenario above,
the estimated transaction price, before and after consideration of the constraint,
can be a number other than those listed. However, because of the transaction
price reassessment requirements, at some point, the transaction price (and the
revenue recognized) will be trued up to the actual outcome achieved.



                  Example D110.1
                  Transaction price is not a possible outcome of the
                  contract
ABC Corp. enters into a contract for a large-scale software customization project
with Customer (i.e. a software license and customization services). Customer
wants to ensure the project is completed on a timely basis and, therefore, has
built into the contract penalties for not meeting the agreed ‘go live’ date. The
contract fees if ABC meets the agreed deadline are $130,000. If the project is not
completed within three months of the deadline, the transaction price is reduced
to $120,000. If the contract is not completed within five months of the deadline,
the transaction price is further reduced to $110,000; completion any time after
six months results in a transaction price of $100,000. However, if ABC completes
the project more than three months ahead of schedule, the transaction price
increases to $150,000.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     319
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Based on these contract terms, there are five possible outcomes for the
transaction price – $150,000; $130,000; $120,000; $110,000; and $100,000.
ABC concludes that the contract includes only a single performance obligation
(see Question C230) that is satisfied over time (see Question F200).
ABC decides that the expected value method is the most appropriate to
estimate the transaction price given the number of possible outcomes and the
fact that ABC enters into a large number of similar significant software
implementation arrangements.
Using the expected value method, ABC assigns weightings to each possible
outcome and estimates the transaction price (before consideration of the
constraint) as follows.

 Transaction price                                                                        Probability            Weighting
 $100,000                                                                                             5%               $5,000
 110,000                                                                                            10%                11,000
 120,000                                                                                            20%                24,000
 130,000                                                                                            50%                65,000
 150,000                                                                                            15%                22,500
 Expected value                                                                                                    $127,500

ABC concludes that it does not need to further constrain the transaction price
from the amount estimated using the expected value method. This is because
the difference between the expected value of $127,500 and the amount to
which ABC is probable of being entitled ($120,000 – i.e. ABC has an 85%
likelihood of being entitled to at least $120,000) is not significant enough to
have the potential to result in a significant revenue reversal given that the
performance obligation will be satisfied over time.
Although $127,500 is not a possible outcome of the contract, ABC uses this
amount as the transaction price at contract inception. In accordance with
paragraph 606-10-32-14, ABC will continue to update the transaction price until
the uncertainty associated with the project’s completion is resolved.



                  Question D120
                  Should variable consideration be included in the
                  transaction price when the entity believes it is
                  unlikely to earn the variable consideration?
Interpretive response: It depends. An entity’s objective when determining the
transaction price for a contract is to estimate the total amount of consideration
that it expects to be entitled to under the contract, subject to the constraint on
variable consideration. If the entity concludes that using the most likely amount
is the more appropriate approach and that amount is zero, then variable
consideration would be excluded from the transaction price at contract
inception. In contrast, if the entity concludes that using the expected value
method is more appropriate, some amount of variable consideration (i.e. more
than zero) will generally be included in the transaction price, even if the entity



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     320
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



thinks it is unlikely to be entitled to any of the variable consideration, unless
application of the constraint results in a minimum amount of zero.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Topic 606 differs from legacy US GAAP because under Topic 606, an entity is
required to estimate variable consideration and include it in the transaction price if
an entity concludes that it is probable that the estimate of variable consideration
is not subject to a risk of significant revenue reversal.
Under legacy US GAAP, which is based on a realization concept, an entity
assesses whether the fee is fixed or determinable. In many situations, entities
concluded that the fee was not fixed or determinable until the underlying
contingency was resolved.



                  Question D130
                  How does a pattern of granting price concessions to
                  customers affect the transaction price?

Interpretive response: Price concessions generally refer to either:
— changes that would have affected the original amount of revenue
  recognized; or
— changes that reduce the arrangement fee or extend the terms of payment.
Changes that increase the promised goods or services or extend the
customer’s rights beyond those in the original transaction are not price
concessions and the effect of such concessions is discussed in Question C90.
Examples of price concessions include, but are not limited to, the following:
— extending payment due dates in the arrangement;
— decreasing total payments due under the arrangement;
— paying financing fees on a customer’s financing arrangement that was not
  contemplated in the original arrangement;
— accepting returns that were not required to be accepted under the terms of
  the original arrangement.
Anticipated price concessions affect the transaction price of a contract with a
customer because the transaction price includes estimates of variable
consideration, which includes any estimated price concessions. An entity with a
history of granting price concessions should estimate the amount of
consideration to which it expects to be entitled after consideration of any price
concessions (i.e. using the expected value method or most likely amount
method) and then should constrain that estimate to the extent it is both (1)
more than remote (i.e. remote meaning ‘unlikely to occur’, and therefore the
converse of ‘probable’, which is defined as ‘likely to occur’) additional
concessions (beyond those factored into the expected value or most likely
amount estimate) will be granted and (2) the effect of granting such additional




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     321
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



concession(s) would be a significant revenue reversal (i.e. the change in the
transaction price from the concession would result in a significant
revenue reversal).
If a software entity grants a price concession where no previous pattern of such
concessions has existed, and therefore, no concession was estimated in the
initial transaction price, the entity would account for that price concession as a
contract modification affecting price only (see Chapter G – Contract
modifications). We would expect accounting for concessions as modifications
to be relatively infrequent because it would generally not require an excessive
number of such concessions before the entity should be factoring those
previously granted concessions into the transaction price of future contracts.
If concessions, such as extending payment due dates or decreasing contract
payments, occur due to customer credit problems, it may also follow that the
entity should reassess whether a contract with the customer exists in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-5.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

See the discussion in Question C90.



                  Example D130.1
                  Pattern of granting price concessions and estimating
                  the transaction price
ABC Corp. licenses ERP software to its customers, typically on a two-, three- or
five-year term basis, with coterminous PCS services that are paid either
annually or quarterly in advance. ABC is a second-tier player in the ERP
software market, and therefore, has a significant incentive to try to ensure it
keeps its existing customers from moving to one of the larger software
providers. As a result, ABC has developed a practice of frequently providing its
customers a discount on its PCS fees from those stated in the original contract
for the final year. This discount has ranged from 20% to 60% with no
discernible pattern and is generally expressed to the customer as a ‘reward’ for
their past loyalty and is reflected on the applicable PCS invoice ABC sends for
the discounted period.
ABC enters into a contract with Customer for a three-year license of its ERP
software and concurrent PCS services for stated contractual fees of $300,000
for the three-year license (paid upfront) and $180,000 in total for three years of
PCS, paid in three $60,000 installments at the beginning of each year ($480,000
in total contractual fees). The software license and the three years of PCS
constitute two separate performance obligations, and ABC transfers the
software license to Customer at contract inception.
ABC concludes that its substantive history of providing these PCS fee discounts
requires it to include an estimate of the future discount it expects to provide
Customer in the transaction price and to consider the constraint on variable



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     322
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



consideration. ABC estimates the discount amount using an expected value
method as there is no most likely discount amount, estimating that a discount
of 42% in the third-year PCS fees will be granted. Consequently, absent
consideration of the constraint, the transaction price at contract inception would
be $454,800 ($480,000 – $25,200, which represents 42% of the $60,000 Year 3
PCS fees). Assuming the stand-alone selling prices of the license and the PCS
are $300,000 and $200,000, respectively, the relative stand-alone selling price
allocation would be as follows.

                                                                  Stand-alone                    Relative stand-alone
                                                                  selling price                          selling price
 License                                                                $300,000                                   $272,880
 PCS                                                                    $200,000                                   $181,920

Because ABC has a history of granting price concessions and those discounts
can range, unpredictably (based on the entity’s customary business practices
and experience), between 20% and 60% of the final year’s contractual PCS
fees, including any of the potential PCS discount less than the 60% maximum
in the transaction price carries the risk of a revenue reversal. However, ABC
does not constrain its estimate of the transaction price below $454,800
because the revenue reversal that would result from the possible incremental
discount of 18% (60% – 42%), or $10,800, regardless of when it occurs during
the contract period, would not be significant to the cumulative revenue
recognized to date under the contract. For example, an adjustment to the
transaction price immediately after transfer of control of the software license
would result in a reversal of only $6,4801 (as compared to cumulative revenue
recognized of $272,880), while an adjustment at the end of Year 2 of the
contract (i.e. immediately before issuing the Year 3 PCS invoice), would only
result in a reversal of $9,3602 (as compared to cumulative revenue recognized
of $394,160,3 assuming a time-based measure of progress is applied to the
three-year PCS performance obligation).
Notes:
1.    $10,800 × ($272,880 ÷ $454,800) = $6,480.
2.    $10,800 × ($394,160 ÷ $454,800) = $9,360.
3.    $272,880 + ($181,920 × 2/3) = $394,160.




                  Question D140
                  How do customer price protection (i.e. retroactive
                  most-favored nations) clauses affect the transaction
                  price?

  Price protection clauses
  An entity may enter into an arrangement with an end customer or a reseller
  and agree to provide a rebate or credit for a portion of the arrangement fee in
  the event the entity reduces the price for the entity’s products. This may
  include reseller scenarios where the reseller has not yet sold the products to
  end customers. These clauses may also apply to services or usage-based



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     323
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



  fees (e.g. a promise that if the entity offers better per-transaction pricing to
  another customer, that it will provide the customer a credit for the difference
  between what it paid and what the new customer is paying).


Interpretive response: Software entities should apply the price concession
accounting model outlined in Question D130 (i.e. the variable consideration
model). Because price protection clauses retroactively change the price paid for
goods or services already transferred (e.g. licenses already transferred) or
partially transferred (e.g. a partially completed software customization project)
to the customer, they are, in essence, just another form of potential price
concession.
Price protection clauses, which apply retrospectively, should be distinguished
from most-favored nations (MFN) clauses that apply only prospectively to
distinct promised goods or services (including distinct goods or services within
a single performance obligation), or optional goods or services, not yet
transferred to the customer. Such clauses do not create variable consideration.
Rather, when the transaction price changes, the entity would account for the
price change as a contract modification in accordance with paragraph 606-10-
25-13(a).



                  Example D140.1
                  Reseller arrangement and price protection capped
                  by the contract
ABC Corp. enters into a distribution agreement with Reseller on January 1,
20X1. The distribution agreement contains a clause that stipulates that in the
event ABC reduces the price of any product in a transaction with a similarly
situated customer, ABC will provide Reseller with a credit equal to the
difference between the original purchase price and the new purchase price of
the product for any units in Reseller’s inventory at the time of the price
reduction, as well as any units of the product purchased and sold by the
Reseller within 180 days of the price reduction up to a maximum amount of
40% of the original purchase price.
On January 1, 20X1 (same day that the contract is entered into), ABC transfers
control of 1,000 licenses of Product A for a nonrefundable fee of $100,000. At
this same time, ABC’s pricing committee is working to determine the amount
of a price reduction for Product A licenses that would apply to similar
customers.
Scenario 1
Because the pricing committee is evaluating a variety of considerations in
attempting to determine the future pricing for licenses to Product A, there is
significant risk in both the amount and the timing of the price concession that
will be granted to Reseller. As a result of the significant uncertainty as to the
price protection ABC will provide the Reseller, ABC concludes that only $60,000
of the $100,000 contract price is not subject to the risk of a significant revenue
reversal – i.e. ABC assumes the maximum amount of price protection stipulated
in the agreement with Reseller will be provided (i.e. at 40% of the $100,000



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     324
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



contract price). Consequently, the transaction price is only $60,000 at the point
in time ABC transfers control of the 1,000 licenses to Reseller.
If ABC’s pricing committee subsequently (e.g. April 1, 20X1) decides to reduce
the price from $100 per license to $70 per license, and determines that no
further price reductions are reasonably expected during the 180-day price
protection period with Reseller, ABC would update its estimated transaction
price for this contract from $60,000 to $70,000, and therefore, would recognize
an additional $10,000 in revenue at that time.
Scenario 2
Alternatively, assume ABC’s pricing committee is further along in its
deliberations of the pricing for Product A licenses such that it is probable that
the price reduction will not exceed 25% of the original $1,000 fee per license.
In this case, the transaction price would be $75,000, which would be
recognized at the point in time ABC transfers control of the 1,000 licenses to
Reseller.
If ABC’s pricing committee subsequently (e.g. February 1, 20X1) decides to
reduce the price from $100 per license to $80 per license, and determines that
no further price reductions are reasonably expected during the 180-day price
protection period with Reseller, ABC would update its estimated transaction
price for this contract from $75,000 to $80,000, and therefore, would recognize
an additional $5,000 in revenue at that time.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The accounting for price protection clauses under Topic 606 will differ from that
under legacy US GAAP as follows:
Software entity was unable to reasonably estimate effect of the price
protection
Under legacy US GAAP, if the software entity was unable to reasonably
estimate future price changes (e.g. in light of competitive conditions), or if
significant uncertainties existed about the entity’s ability to maintain its price,
the arrangement fee was not fixed or determinable. In such circumstances,
revenue from the arrangement was deferred until the entity was able to
reasonably estimate the effects of future price changes.
Under Topic 606, the entity estimates the transaction price, subject to the
constraint, generally resulting in at least some revenue recognition for
transferred software licenses where no revenue would have been recognized
under legacy US GAAP.
Software entity was able to reasonably estimate effect of the price
protection
Under legacy US GAAP, if the software entity was able to reasonably estimate
the amount of the fee that may be subject to rebate or forfeiture as a result of
the entity reducing its price for a product, the entity generally would recognize
revenue for the arrangement with a reserve established (classified as a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     325
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



reduction of revenue) for the estimated amount of the price concessions to be
granted assuming all of the other legacy US GAAP software revenue
recognition criteria were met.
This situation is similar to the requirements under Topic 606; however, legacy
US GAAP differs from Topic 606 because, under legacy US GAAP in this
scenario, a software entity would use its best estimate to determine the
amount of revenue it could recognize when it delivered the software, while
under Topic 606 the entity would have to consider the variable consideration
constraint – i.e. incorporate a conservative bias to the determination of the
transaction price. The conservative nature of the constraint versus a ‘best
estimate’ may mean entities in this scenario would recognize less revenue at
the time the software licenses are transferred to the customer under Topic 606
than they would have under legacy US GAAP.
Software entity was able to reasonably estimate, but estimated amount
was unusually large
Under legacy US GAAP, even if the entity was able to reasonably estimate the
amount of the fee, including within a narrow range, that may be subject to
rebate or forfeiture as a result of the entity reducing its price for a product, it
would also need to consider whether the amount (or narrow range) associated
with the estimated price concession was unusually large. If so, the entity would
evaluate whether revenue recognition was appropriate at all because an
unusually large amount of estimated price protection may have been indicative
of an arrangement granting the use of software for evaluation or demonstration
purposes rather than an arrangement involving a valid sale. It might otherwise
also call into question whether the fee is fixed or determinable.
While no revenue recognition might occur in these scenarios under legacy US
GAAP, under Topic 606, the entity would generally recognize at least some
revenue once it transferred control of the license because the transaction price
will include the entity’s estimate of the amount to which it will ultimately be
entitled, which even if subject to the constraint will typically be an amount
greater than zero.



                  Question D150
                  Do extended payment terms create variable
                  consideration in a contract with a customer?


  Extended payment terms
  Extended payment terms in software arrangements have generally been
  defined as those in which payment of a significant portion of the license fee
  is not required until more than 12 months after software delivery; however,
  they can include any payment terms that are elongated from the entity’s
  customary payment terms.


Interpretive response: Extended payment terms may be explicitly stated in a
contract or they may be implied through an entity’s past actions or customer




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     326
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



expectations. Extended payment terms are not in and of themselves a form of
variable consideration, provided those payment terms are fixed. However,
contracts that feature extended payment terms may be more likely to include
other forms of variable consideration. For example, the risk that an entity will
grant a concession to the customer increases in situations where there are
extended payment terms. This is because an entity’s commitment to enforce
payment may diminish if new or enhanced products are introduced by the entity
or its competitors. This risk increases to the extent that the software is
susceptible to rapid technological obsolescence. That is, if the underlying
software is at risk of becoming technologically obsolete before a customer is
required to make payment to the software entity, a concession becomes even
more likely.
As part of their overall assessment of the risk of concessions, software entities
generally should consider their historical collection history for sales of similar
software licenses when estimating the frequency, extent and likelihood of
potential price concessions for a group of contracts, or for a specific contract. If
a contract, or group of contracts, have payment terms that are longer than a
software entity typically offers for a given type of software product, then
historical collection patterns may be a less useful predictive measure when
estimating the likelihood and amount of potential price concessions. This may
also be the case when a software entity enters a new market with a product
that may have a different technological useful life than the entity’s other
products. The existence of extended payment terms and the payment term
length offered to different customers could also be considered when applying
an approach that uses a portfolio of data for the purposes of estimating
payment concessions.
Software entities should apply the price concession accounting model outlined
in Question D130 in accounting for any potential changes in the transaction
price related to concessions arising from extended payment terms.
Even if a contract with extended payment terms does not give rise to a
potential concession, contracts with extended payment terms may include a
significant financing component that should be accounted for in determining the
transaction price. The existence and accounting for significant financing
components is discussed in the next section of this chapter.



                  Example D150.1
                  Extended payment terms
ABC Corp. enters into a five-year license to Software Product X with Customer
for $1,500,000. Customer will pay that fee in equal quarterly installments over
the five-year license period. ABC’s current product development roadmap
(which is not provided to Customer) shows that it expects to introduce a
replacement software product to Product X before the end of the third year of
the contract with Customer. The contract with Customer does not include
rights to future when-and-if developed software products or any specified right
to obtain a license to the expected replacement software product.
ABC does not have a history of granting price or other concessions to customers;
however, it has not previously introduced a replacement of one of its core



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     327
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



software products. Because Customer has no history of granting concessions,
these circumstances of forthcoming product release alone may not mean a
concession is reasonably possible, especially if there is a risk the replacement
product will not be developed and released on schedule. If the likelihood of a
concession is remote, then it may have no effect on the transaction price. This is
because it would be probable that no concession will be granted (i.e. it is probable
that no significant revenue reversal would result from use of the stated contract
price, without consideration of a possible concession, as the transaction price). It
should be noted that use by ABC of an expected value estimation technique
could still result in a reduction of the transaction price for the effect of a
concession (e.g. if there is a chance of a concession that is more than ‘remote’).
However, given no history of concessions in similar arrangements, ABC might
conclude an expected value method is not appropriate or may conclude,
consistent with Question D50, that it does not need to include the remote
possibility of granting a concession in its expected value determination.
ABC needs to apply judgment in this example to determine whether the
likelihood of a concession is more than remote (e.g. whether ABC might grant
Customer a license to the replacement software product, reduce Customer’s
remaining payments for its Product X license after the replacement product is
released or grant Customer X a discounted license to Product X). Individual
facts and circumstances could significantly affect the conclusion. For example,
accounting for a possible concession (whether a price concession or otherwise,
such as a license to the replacement software product) would likely be
appropriate if ABC’s management is discussing possible concessions or
incentives that should be offered in order to retain customers like Customer
who might be on term licenses to the older Product X when the replacement
product is released. Question C90 addresses the accounting for concessions
consisting of free or discounted goods or services, while Question D130
addresses price concessions. ABC will also need to consider whether the
extended payment terms for the five-year software license mean the contract
includes a significant financing component. Significant financing components
are discussed in beginning with Question D230.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy US GAAP contained considerable guidance, including implementation
guidance, on the effect of extended payment terms in software arrangements.
In general, legacy US GAAP specified that an arrangement fee should be
presumed not to be fixed or determinable if payment of a significant portion of
the licensing fee is not due until after expiration of the license or more than
12 months after delivery. That presumption could be overcome by evidence
that the entity had a standard business practice of using long-term or
installment contracts and a history of successfully collecting under the original
payment terms without making concessions (paragraphs 985-605-55-22 through
55-25).
If, at the outset of an arrangement, an entity concluded that the arrangement fee
was not fixed or determinable, the entire fee would be recognized only as




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     328
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



payments became due and payable, assuming all other revenue recognition
criteria were met. In addition, legacy US GAAP provided that:
— A modification of payment terms at a subsequent date would not trigger a
  reassessment of whether the fees were fixed or determinable. However, in
  cases where an existing arrangement with a customer was replaced by a
  substantially new arrangement (e.g. the entity and the customer contract
  for substantial additional deliverables with an appropriate corresponding
  increase in aggregate fees), it was considered appropriate to reassess
  whether the fees were fixed or determinable at inception of the new
  arrangement.
— In an extended payment terms scenario where the entity recognizes
  revenue as the payments became due and payable, an entity could
  recognize revenue at the time the prepayments were received (i.e. before
  they were due and payable under the terms of the original contract)
  provided all other revenue recognition criteria were met (paragraph 985-
  605-55-15).
— If an entity entered into a software arrangement with extended payment
  terms, and then received payment in full subsequent to its financial
  reporting period-end, but before issuing its financial statements for that
  period, it was not appropriate to reassess whether the fees were fixed or
  determinable at period-end (i.e. this subsequent payment would not allow
  the software entity to recognize the license fees in the reporting period that
  just ended). The entity would recognize the license fees as revenue of the
  period in which they were paid (paragraphs 985-605-55-26 through 55-30).
— The presumption that a software license fee was not fixed or determinable
  (e.g. under an extended payment terms scenario) was not overcome if,
  whether at the outset of the arrangement or subsequently, the software
  entity transferred its rights to receive amounts due under an extended
  payment term arrangement to an independent third party. This transfer did
  not change the nature or structure of the transaction between the software
  entity and customer, even if the extended payment term arrangement is
  irrevocably transferred or otherwise converted to cash without recourse to
  the entity (paragraphs 985-605-55-31 and 985-605-55-32).
Under Topic 606 there is not a fixed or determinable criterion for revenue
recognition, and therefore extended payment terms do not create the
presumption of a price concession. And even where a concession may be
expected because of extended payment terms, the accounting for expected
price or other concessions under Topic 606 will generally not delay revenue
recognition under the contract as significantly as the expectation of concessions
did under legacy US GAAP. That is, entities that expect to grant price or other
concessions under a contract will generally recognize revenue for that contract
in advance of when they would have been able to recognize revenue for that
same contract under legacy US GAAP. See further discussion in Question C90.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     329
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Question D160
                  How should prompt payment discounts be
                  considered when determining the transaction price
                  of a contract?
Interpretive response: Contracts with customers often have terms that
incentivize prompt payment by the customer such as ‘2/10 net 30’ (2%
discount for payment to an entity within 10 days or pay the full invoice amount
within 30 days). The potential 2% discount is variable consideration that affects
the transaction price in the same manner as any other variable consideration.
As such, the entity would make an estimate of the consideration it expects to
be entitled to as a result of offering these terms using the most likely amount or
the expected value method. Consistent with the overall variable consideration
model, the entity would analyze their experience with similar customers and
transactions in making this estimate and that estimate would then be subject to
the variable consideration constraint.



                   Question D165
                   Are liquidated damages or similar provisions
                   variable consideration?
Interpretive response: Generally, yes. Many contracts contain terms providing
for liquidated damages and similar compensation to the customer upon the
occurrence or nonoccurrence of certain events. These terms typically give rise
to variable consideration, given the standard identifies penalties as variable
consideration.
However, in some circumstances the terms may be similar to a warranty
provision. Judgment is required to distinguish those terms that are accounted
for as warranties from the more common scenarios in which the terms give rise
to variable consideration.
For example, if a third party repairs a defective product sold by an entity and the
entity reimburses the customer for costs incurred, that may be similar to a
warranty. Those payments to a customer are typically accounted for as an
assurance-type warranty rather than variable consideration. Similarly, the
payments are typically not treated as consideration payable to a customer
because the payments provide the entity with an identifiable benefit of repairing
the goods or services initially provided to the customer.



                  Question D170
                  How do service level agreements (SLAs) that could
                  result in refunds or credits to the customer affect
                  the transaction price?
Interpretive response: Credits or refunds to a customer that result from the
failure of the entity to meet certain standards under the contract are



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     330
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



adjustments to the transaction price (reductions of revenue), and therefore they
should be estimated at the outset of the arrangement in the same manner as
any other variable consideration – i.e. using the most likely amount or the
expected value method. As with other forms of variable consideration, those
estimates are then subject to the constraint on variable consideration. The
estimates, including the effect of the constraint on those estimates, are revised
and the transaction price adjusted until the uncertainty is resolved.



                  Example D170.1
                  Service level agreements
SaaS Company enters into a standard contract with Customer to provide access
to its hosted application for three years. Monthly fees are $100 throughout the
three-year term, subject to a service level provision under which SaaS Company
warrants that the hosted application will be available and functioning to
specifications during the service period at least 99% of the time (i.e. the
maximum percentage of downtime for maintenance or due to increased
network traffic will be 1%). In any month that the downtime is greater than 1%,
Customer will be entitled to a 10% credit of that month’s fees against the next
month’s $100 payment – i.e. Customer will pay $90 in any month following a
month in which downtime is greater than 1%. In addition, if the downtime is
greater than 5%, SaaS Company will be required to provide a 25% credit of that
month’s fees in the next month.
Scenario 1
SaaS Company has significant experience with similar contracts and has an
established history of rarely having to grant service level credits to customers.
Based on this significant experience, SaaS Company concludes that using the
most likely amount method to estimate the variable consideration in the
contract resulting from the possible service level credits will best predict the
consideration to which it will be entitled. Applying that method, SaaS Company
concludes that it expects to be entitled to 100% of the contract price (i.e.
downtime will be less than 1% for the duration of the agreement because it
does not expect to issue any credits or refunds). Further, SaaS Company’s
experience is of such a substantive nature and so rarely has to grant service
level credits that the estimate of variable consideration does need to be
constrained – i.e. it is probable that including the entire stated fees for the
three-year term of $3,600, without any reduction for possible service level
credits, in the transaction price at contract inception will not result in a
significant revenue reversal. Consequently, the transaction price does not
reflect any expectation of service level credits.
Scenario 2
SaaS Company has been operating for a relatively short period of time such that
its experience with these types of arrangements is limited. Consequently, SaaS
Company cannot conclude that it is probable it will not grant any service level
credits to Customer during the course of the contract and will need to estimate
expected service level credits over the three-year term. SaaS Company
considers all of its available and relevant evidence, including knowledge about
the quality of its infrastructure, industry benchmarks and its own limited



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     331
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



experience in developing an expected value method to estimate the credits it
expects to provide to Customer over the three-year term. SaaS Company
further considers whether it is probable, if it uses that estimate as the
transaction price, that no significant revenue reversal will result.
ABC will continue to re-evaluate its estimate of the transaction price, including
the effect of the constraint (if applicable), at the end of each reporting period for
changes in circumstances (e.g. additional experience gained).



                   Question D175
                   Does an entity first estimate variable consideration
                   and then apply the constraint to that estimate?
Interpretive response: Not necessarily. An entity isn’t required to strictly
follow the two-step process if its process for estimating variable consideration
already incorporates the principles on which the guidance for constraining
estimates of variable consideration is based.
For example, when an entity estimates revenue from sales of goods with a
right of return, it might not practically need to estimate the expected revenue
and then apply the constraint guidance to that estimate. This will be the case if
its calculation of the estimated revenue incorporates its expectations of returns
at a level at which it is probable that the cumulative amount of revenue
recognized would not result in a significant revenue reversal. [ASU 2014-09.BC215]
If an entity decides not to strictly follow the two-step approach, it is
nevertheless important that its estimated transaction price includes its
expectations of the amount of variable consideration that is probable of not
being subject to a significant reversal of the cumulative revenue recognized.



                   Question D176
                   Is the unit of account for determining the constraint
                   at the contract or performance obligation level?
Interpretive response: Contract level. The unit of account for determining the
transaction price, and therefore the constraint, is at the contract level – it is not
at the performance obligation level. While this is not explicitly stated in the
standard, the TRG agreed that the unit of account for applying the constraint is
the contract. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 14]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     332
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Question D180
                  What factors influence the potential magnitude of a
                  revenue reversal that would result from a
                  downward adjustment to an entity’s estimate of
                  variable consideration?
Interpretive response: Because the constraint is intended to significantly
reduce the likelihood that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative
revenue recognized for the contract will occur (i.e. it considers the magnitude of
any potential revenue reversal), the following affect (1) whether the constraint
results in an adjustment to the entity’s most likely amount or expected-value
method estimate of variable consideration and, if so, (2) the amount of that
adjustment.
— The identification of the performance obligations in the contract (e.g.
  whether a license and professional services are or are not distinct).
— If there are multiple performance obligations in the contract, the order in
  which those performance obligations are satisfied.
— Whether some or all of the performance obligations in the contract are
  satisfied over time or at a point in time.



                  Example D180.1
                  Effect of various scenarios on the potential
                  magnitude of a revenue reversal
This example outlines three scenarios in order to illustrate how the above-
outlined factors affect the potential magnitude of a revenue reversal resulting
from a change in the amount of estimated variable consideration.
Scenario 1
ABC enters into a contract with Customer that includes a software license and
implementation services that are separate performance obligations. The
software license is transferred at contract inception and the implementation
services are provided over the subsequent 12 months. The fixed consideration
is $1,000,000, and ABC can earn up to a $200,000 bonus depending on when
the implementation services are completed. Based on the stand-alone selling
prices of the license and the services, determined using a residual approach and
the observable stand-alone selling price, respectively (see Chapter E – Step 4:
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract);
the transaction price is allocated on an 80:20 ratio to the license and
implementation services, respectively.
On a most likely amount basis, ABC concludes that it expects to be entitled to
$150,000 of the performance bonus. However, it is only ‘probable’ that ABC will
be entitled to $50,000. Assume ABC concludes that it cannot allocate the
performance bonus to only the license or the implementation services.
Because the distinct software license is transferred to Customer at contract
inception, if ABC were to include $150,000 of variable consideration in the
transaction price at contract inception (i.e. if ABC were not to constrain any of



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     333
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



its most likely estimate of variable consideration), and later have to revise its
estimate to the probable amount of $50,000, ABC would record a revenue
reversal of at least (i.e. depending on progress toward satisfaction of the
implementation services at the time the estimate is revised) $80,000
($100,000 [$150,000 – $50,000] × 80%). The portion of the remaining $20,000
of the change in the transaction price ($100,000 – $80,000) that will be
immediately reversed against revenue depends on ABC’s completion of the
implementation services when the change in the transaction price occurs (e.g.
if ABC is 50% complete with the implementation services, ABC’s total
revenue reversal will be $90,000 [$80,000 attributable to the license; $10,000
attributable to the services]).
Because the potential revenue reversal could be significant, ABC concludes that
the variable consideration constraint should be applied.
Scenario 2
ABC enters into a contract with Customer that includes a software license and
customization services that are a single, combined performance obligation. The
combined performance obligation is satisfied over time and is expected to be
satisfied over 12-15 months after contract inception. The fixed consideration is
$1,000,000; and ABC can earn up to a $200,000 bonus depending on when the
software customization is completed.
On a most likely amount basis, ABC concludes that it expects to be entitled to
$150,000 of the performance bonus. However, it is only ‘probable’ that ABC will
be entitled to $50,000.
If ABC were to include $150,000 of variable consideration in the transaction
price at contract inception, and later have to revise its estimate to the probable
amount of $50,000, ABC’s revenue reversal at that point in time would be less
than that in Scenario 1 and would depend on ABC’s progress toward
satisfaction of the performance obligation. For example:

 % Complete                                                                                           Revenue reversal
 10%                                                                                                                 $10,000
 25%                                                                                                                 $25,000
 60%                                                                                                                 $60,000


Consequently, the magnitude of the revenue reversal that would result from a
potential downward adjustment in ABC’s estimate of variable consideration to
which it expects to be entitled in this scenario is less significant throughout the
contract period than in Scenario 1. As a result, ABC concludes that it does not
need to constrain its estimate of the variable consideration to which it expects
to be entitled and includes the entire $150,000 estimate in the contract
inception transaction price.
Scenario 3
Assume the same facts and circumstances as Scenario 2 except that the single,
combined performance obligation is satisfied at a point-in-time (e.g. due to
highly specialized customer acceptance provisions – see Question F210) upon
completion of the software customization.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     334
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



On a most likely amount basis, ABC concludes that it expects to be entitled to
$150,000 of the performance bonus. However, it is only ‘probable’ that ABC will
be entitled to $50,000.
In this scenario, the constraint would not result in an adjustment to the
transaction price because no revenue will be recognized until the uncertainty
giving rise to the variable consideration is resolved – i.e. because no revenue
will be recognized until the performance obligation is completely satisfied, no
cumulative revenue will have been recognized at the point in time any
downward adjustments to ABC’s estimate of the variable consideration to
which it expects to be entitled are made.
Note: Based on the above, software entities should be aware that the
constraint is more likely to apply in arrangements where a distinct software
license is transferred to the customer upfront and a significant portion of the
transaction price is allocated to that upfront software license – i.e. unless the
source of the variable consideration is a sales- or usage-based royalty, to which
the constraint on variable consideration does not apply (see below). As
illustrated in the example, Scenario 1, a change in the estimate of, for example,
a performance bonus on distinct implementation services would not only affect
revenue recognized to-date for the partially completed implementation services,
but also for the already-transferred software license.



                   Question D185
                   How does an entity account for a change in
                   estimate that results in a significant revenue
                   reversal?
Interpretive response: While it was the standard’s intention that in most cases
changes to variable consideration would be an upward (an increase in the
transaction price) or an insignificant downward revision, there may be
circumstances in which the change in estimate results in a significant reversal
when compared to the cumulative revenue recognized. The threshold for
determining whether a significant reversal would occur is ‘probable’ and not
‘virtually certain’; as such the standard allows for a reasonable possibility that a
significant reversal will occur.
If the significant reversal is due to new facts or circumstances that were not
available at the time of the initial estimate, the change is accounted for as a
change in estimate just like any other change in the transaction price. This
might be the case if an entity estimated a usage-based fee in a service contract
for which it had extensive experience with the customer (and similar
customers) but unexpected circumstances subsequently led to the customer
losing market share resulting in the usage of the service significantly declining.
Notwithstanding the paragraph above, an entity needs to evaluate whether the
change is a change in estimate or the result of an error in accordance with
Topic 250 (accounting changes and error corrections). If the change is a result
of a misunderstanding of the facts and circumstances that were reasonably
available when making the initial estimates, the entity would have an
accounting error and would need to assess the materiality and any related




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     335
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



correction to current and prior periods to determine the appropriate process for
correcting the error. See chapter 4 of KPMG Handbook, Accounting changes
and error corrections, for additional information on how to identify, account for
and present error corrections.


Sales- and usage-based royalties
Variable consideration in the form of a sales- or usage-based royalty that is
promised in exchange for a license of intellectual property (e.g. a software
license) is not subject to the constraint on variable consideration. Rather, such
royalties are subject to a specific sales- and usage-based royalties recognition
exception (‘the royalties constraint’) that is further discussed in Chapter F –
Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance
obligation.
The royalties constraint does not apply to either:
— sales of intellectual property (e.g. the sale of a software application and all
  related rights to that application to another party); or
— usage-based fees in SaaS arrangements because, as described in
  Chapter A – Scope, SaaS arrangements do not include a license to
  software.
Sales- and usage-based fees promised in exchange for the sale of intellectual
property or included in SaaS arrangements are subject to the general guidance
on variable consideration, including the constraint on variable consideration,
outlined earlier in this chapter.
When determining the applicability of the royalties constraint, an entity should
not attempt to discern whether a license to intellectual property is an ‘in
substance sale’ of that intellectual property. The FASB reached this conclusion
on the basis that attempting to distinguish between licenses that are, or are
not, in substance sales would add significant complexity (i.e. trying to
distinguish what licenses constitute in substance sales) and that it may be
inappropriate to ignore, for accounting purposes, legal differences between a
contract for a license and a contract for an outright sale of intellectual property.
[ASU 2016-10.BC78(b)].




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Variable consideration that is not a sales- or usage-based royalty
promised in exchange for a license
Under legacy US GAAP, arrangement fees were not recognized as revenue until
they were fixed or determinable and any fees contingent on future performance
(e.g. delivery of an additional good or service) were deferred until the
contingency was resolved (the ‘contingent cash cap’).
Topic 606 does not require fees to be fixed or determinable and does not have
a contingent cash cap, rather Topic 606 follows the estimation and constraint
guidance described above. The change in the guidance pertaining to




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     336
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



variable/contingent consideration will likely result in many entities recognizing
revenue earlier than they did under legacy US GAAP and also require many
entities to implement new processes and controls in order to permit them to
meet the new estimation requirements and make the judgments necessary to
apply the constraint.
Sales- or usage-based royalties promised in exchange for a license
See Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
performance obligation.
Sell-in vs sell-through
Under legacy US GAAP, some software entities that sell their software licenses
through distributors or resellers conclude that the fees for its sales to distributors
or resellers are not fixed or determinable because of the risk of granting price
concessions or of accepting returns. Those entities recognize revenue upon ‘sell-
through’ of the software license to the end customer (i.e. when an end customer
obtains the software from the reseller).
In contrast, under Topic 606, an expectation of price concessions or returns is
variable consideration. And because variable consideration does not affect the
timing of revenue, which is recognized when or as the performance obligation
is satisfied, only the amount, software entities in distributor or reseller
arrangements cannot default to a sell-through method. Under Topic 606, the
software entity is generally required to determine the total amount of
consideration to which it expects to be entitled (e.g. the number of units it
expects not to be returned and the amount it expects to be entitled to, after any
price concessions, for those units), subject to the variable consideration
constraint. The entity recognizes that amount at the time control of the
license(s) transfers to the distributor or reseller. Sell-through (or a result
approximating sell-through) would typically not be appropriate unless:
— control of the licenses has not transferred to the distributor or reseller – e.g.
  certain (substantive) repurchase rights of the entity that exist in some
  distributor relationships to buy back a good until the point in time it is sold
  to an end customer will affect when control of the license transfers; or
— by applying the constraint, the amount recognized upon transfer of control
  of the licenses to the distributor or reseller is zero (which will not usually be
  the case) – i.e. the entire amount of consideration is at risk of a significant
  revenue reversal (which would be an infrequent fact pattern). Given that the
  entity needs to update its assessment of whether an estimate of the
  amount is constrained, and if so, by how much, at each reporting date,
  even if the initial transaction price is zero at the point in time control
  transfers to the distributor or reseller, the transaction price likely will be
  updated to an amount above zero, and revenue recognized, before sell-
  through occurs.
The transaction price is updated each reporting period until the uncertainty for
concessions and returns is resolved.
As a result, it is likely that revenue will be recognized on many sales to
distributors or resellers earlier under Topic 606 than it was under legacy
US GAAP.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     337
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Question D190
                  Are subsequent sales or usage of licensed software
                  variable consideration or is each subsequent sale or
                  usage an ‘optional purchase’?
See Question C380 in Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations
in the contract.



                  Question D200
                  Is the contractual right to acquire additional users,
                  seats or copies of software a sales- or usage-based
                  fee (i.e. variable consideration) or a customer option
                  to acquire additional software licenses?
See Question C390 in Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations
in the contract.



                  Question D210
                  Are SaaS providers required to estimate
                  transaction-based fees that will be earned from
                  customers in SaaS arrangements?
Interpretive response: It depends. Transaction-based fees (e.g. fees charged
for each use by the customer, or the customer’s customer of the SaaS
provider’s application) are just one form of variable consideration (see
Question C400 for discussion of options to add users or seats in a SaaS
arrangement). Therefore, SaaS providers are required to estimate such
fees, just as they would other forms of variable consideration (e.g. service
level agreements – see Question D170), unless they meet one of two
conditions; either:
— the 'as-invoiced' practical expedient in paragraph 606-10-55-18 can be
  applied that permits an entity to recognize revenue from items like
  transaction-based fees in the amount to which it has a right to invoice the
  customer. This applies if that amount corresponds directly with the value to
  the customer of the entity's performance completed to date. A significant
  upfront fee or a usage-based fee rate that changes during the contract
  period in a manner that cannot be directly linked to a change in value of the
  entity’s services to the customer may preclude use of this expedient.
  Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
  performance obligation discusses in further detail when use of this practical
  expedient is, and is not, appropriate.
— the SaaS performance obligation is determined to be a series of distinct
  service periods (e.g. a series of distinct daily, monthly or annual periods of
  service) – which will generally be the case (see the Overview section of




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     338
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



      Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract),
      and allocation of the fees earned to each distinct service period based on
      the customer's usage each period would reasonably reflect the fees to
      which the entity expects to be entitled for providing the SaaS for that
      period. Consistent with the as-invoiced practical expedient, a usage-based
      fee rate that differs from period to period during the contract may prevent
      allocation of the fees earned in a single distinct service period to that
      period, as might a discount or rebate that is based on metrics that cross
      multiple distinct service periods. However, unlike the as-invoiced practical
      expedient, an upfront fee generally will not affect whether this condition is
      met. Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance
      obligations in the contract discusses when SaaS providers will and will not
      be able to allocate transaction-based fees to distinct service periods within
      a SaaS performance obligation.



                  Question D220
                  How do volume-based discounts and rebates affect
                  the estimation of the transaction price in SaaS
                  arrangements?
Interpretive response: First, transaction- and usage-based pricing should
be distinguished from customer options to add users or seats (see
Question C400).
SaaS arrangements that include transaction- or usage-based fees often include
tiered pricing and/or volume rebates or credits. The following are examples.
— Per transaction pricing that decreases prospectively as the customer makes
  greater use of the provider’s platform (e.g. $0.10 per transaction for the first
  100 transactions; $0.09 per transaction for the next 100; and $0.075 per
  transaction for those above 200).
— Per transaction pricing that decreases as the customer makes greater use
  of the provider’s platform on a retrospective basis. For example, the
  customer is required to pay $0.10 per transaction for the first 100
  transactions, and if the customer reaches that milestone it will pay $0.09 on
  all transactions going forward and receive a rebate (or credit toward future
  transaction fees) of $0.01 on the first 100 transactions processed.
Pricing arrangements such as these sometimes apply to an entire contract term
or to distinct periods within the contract. For example, a tiered-pricing or
volume rebate/credit structure may apply to each month, quarter or year within
a longer-term SaaS arrangement and reset at the beginning of the next distinct
period. These are just examples as there are many different transaction- and
usage-based pricing structures that exist and they frequently co-exist with
varied fixed price components.
In general, transaction-based fees in a SaaS arrangement constitute variable
consideration, rather than optional purchases (see Question C380). The
complexity of the pricing structure (e.g. the presence of pricing tiers,
rebate/credit provisions and resets) does not change that, but may influence
whether the SaaS provider can make use of either approach described in



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     339
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Question D210 to avoid having to estimate that variable consideration – i.e. the
less ‘vanilla’ the transaction-based pricing structure, the more likely the provider
will have to undertake some measure of estimation of the variable
consideration in order to recognize revenue on the arrangement under
Topic 606. Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance
obligations in the contract discusses in further detail the effect of these types of
pricing structures on the SaaS provider’s ability to apply the variable
consideration allocation guidance.
If the SaaS provider is required to estimate the variable consideration in the
arrangement – whether for the entire contract term or just for a distinct period
within the overall contract term – possible refunds, rebates or credits will factor
into the estimate of variable consideration, just as the expected transaction
volume will. Multiple variables – i.e. variable usage and variable pricing – will
increase the complexity of the estimation process and likely result in more
variability throughout the contract term, meaning entities in these situations
may have to undertake multiple re-estimations of the transaction price over the
course of the contract (and likely more so in circumstances where the
estimation period is the entire contract term or a longer distinct period within
the contract term, such as a year versus a quarter or month).



The existence of a significant financing
component in the contract

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > The Existence of a Significant Financing Component in the Contract
32-15 In determining the transaction price, an entity shall adjust the promised
amount of consideration for the effects of the time value of money if the
timing of payments agreed to by the parties to the contract (either explicitly or
implicitly) provides the customer or the entity with a significant benefit of
financing the transfer of goods or services to the customer. In those
circumstances, the contract contains a significant financing component. A
significant financing component may exist regardless of whether the promise
of financing is explicitly stated in the contract or implied by the payment terms
agreed to by the parties to the contract.
32-16 The objective when adjusting the promised amount of consideration for
a significant financing component is for an entity to recognize revenue at an
amount that reflects the price that a customer would have paid for the
promised goods or services if the customer had paid cash for those goods or
services when (or as) they transfer to the customer (that is, the cash selling
price). An entity shall consider all relevant facts and circumstances in assessing
whether a contract contains a financing component and whether that financing
component is significant to the contract, including both of the following:
a. The difference, if any, between the amount of promised consideration and
   the cash selling price of the promised goods or services
b. The combined effect of both of the following:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     340
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



       1. The expected length of time between when the entity transfers the
          promised goods or services to the customer and when the customer
          pays for those goods or services
       2. The prevailing interest rates in the relevant market.
32-17 Notwithstanding the assessment in paragraph 606-10-32-16, a contract
with a customer would not have a significant financing component if any of the
following factors exist:
a. The customer paid for the goods or services in advance, and the timing of
   the transfer of those goods or services is at the discretion of the customer.
b. A substantial amount of the consideration promised by the customer is
   variable, and the amount or timing of that consideration varies on the basis
   of the occurrence or nonoccurrence of a future event that is not
   substantially within the control of the customer or the entity (for example,
   if the consideration is a sales-based royalty).
c. The difference between the promised consideration and the cash selling
   price of the good or service (as described in paragraph 606-10-32-16) arises
   for reasons other than the provision of finance to either the customer or
   the entity, and the difference between those amounts is proportional to
   the reason for the difference. For example, the payment terms might
   provide the entity or the customer with protection from the other party
   failing to adequately complete some or all of its obligations under the
   contract.
32-18 As a practical expedient, an entity need not adjust the promised amount
of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component if the
entity expects, at contract inception, that the period between when the entity
transfers a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer
pays for that good or service will be one year or less.
32-19 To meet the objective in paragraph 606-10-32-16 when adjusting the
promised amount of consideration for a significant financing component, an
entity shall use the discount rate that would be reflected in a separate
financing transaction between the entity and its customer at contract inception.
That rate would reflect the credit characteristics of the party receiving financing
in the contract, as well as any collateral or security provided by the customer or
the entity, including assets transferred in the contract. An entity may be able to
determine that rate by identifying the rate that discounts the nominal amount
of the promised consideration to the price that the customer would pay in cash
for the goods or services when (or as) they transfer to the customer. After
contract inception, an entity shall not update the discount rate for changes in
interest rates or other circumstances (such as a change in the assessment of
the customer’s credit risk).
32-20 An entity shall present the effects of financing (interest income or
interest expense) separately from revenue from contracts with customers in
the statement of comprehensive income (statement of activities). Interest
income or interest expense is recognized only to the extent that a contract
asset (or receivable) or a contract liability is recognized in accounting for a
contract with a customer. In accounting for the effects of the time value of
money, an entity also shall consider the subsequent measurement guidance in
Subtopic 835-30, specifically the guidance in paragraphs 835-30-45-1A through
45-3 on presentation of the discount and premium in the financial statements




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     341
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



and the guidance in paragraphs 835-30-55-2 through 55-3 on the application of
the interest method.
• • > Example 28—Determining the Discount Rate
55-235 An entity enters into a contract with a customer to sell equipment.
Control of the equipment transfers to the customer when the contract is
signed. The price stated in the contract is $1 million plus a 5 percent
contractual rate of interest, payable in 60 monthly installments of $18,871.
• • • > Case A—Contractual Discount Rate Reflects the Rate in a Separate
Financing Transaction
55-236 In evaluating the discount rate in the contract that contains a significant
financing component, the entity observes that the 5 percent contractual rate of
interest reflects the rate that would be used in a separate financing transaction
between the entity and its customer at contract inception (that is, the
contractual rate of interest of 5 percent reflects the credit characteristics of the
customer).
55-237 The market terms of the financing mean that the cash selling price of
the equipment is $1 million. This amount is recognized as revenue and as a
loan receivable when control of the equipment transfers to the customer. The
entity accounts for the receivable in accordance with Topic 310 on receivables
and Subtopic 835-30 on the imputation of interest.
• • • > Case B—Contractual Discount Rate Does Not Reflect the Rate in a
Separate Financing Transaction
55-238 In evaluating the discount rate in the contract that contains a significant
financing component, the entity observes that the 5 percent contractual rate of
interest is significantly lower than the 12 percent interest rate that would be
used in a separate financing transaction between the entity and its customer at
contract inception (that is, the contractual rate of interest of 5 percent does not
reflect the credit characteristics of the customer). This suggests that the cash
selling price is less than $1 million.
55-239 In accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-19, the entity determines the
transaction price by adjusting the promised amount of consideration to reflect
the contractual payments using the 12 percent interest rate that reflects the
credit characteristics of the customer. Consequently, the entity determines
that the transaction price is $848,357 (60 monthly payments of $18,871
discounted at 12 percent). The entity recognizes revenue and a loan receivable
for that amount. The entity accounts for the loan receivable in accordance with
Topic 310 on receivables and Subtopic 835-30 on the imputation of interest.
Pending Content
Transition Date: (P) December 16, 2019; (N) December 16, 2022 ¦ Transition
Guidance: 326-10-65-1
55-237 … The entity accounts for the receivable in accordance with Topic 310
on receivables, Subtopic 326-20 on financial instruments measured at
amortized cost, and Subtopic 835-30 on the imputation of interest.
55-239 … The entity accounts for the loan receivable in accordance with
Subtopic 310-10 on receivables, Subtopic 326-20 on financial instruments




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     342
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



measured at amortized cost, and Subtopic 835-30 on the imputation of
interest.
• • > Example 30—Advance Payment
55-244 An entity, a technology product manufacturer, enters into a contract
with a customer to provide global telephone technology support and repair
coverage for three years along with its technology product. The customer
purchases this support service at the time of buying the product. Consideration
for the service is an additional $300. Customers electing to buy this service
must pay for it upfront (that is, a monthly payment option is not available).
55-245 To determine whether there is a significant financing component in the
contract, the entity considers the nature of the service being offered and the
purpose of the payment terms. The entity charges a single upfront amount, not
with the primary purpose of obtaining financing from the customer but,
instead, to maximize profitability, taking into consideration the risks associated
with providing the service. Specifically, if customers could pay monthly, they
would be less likely to renew, and the population of customers that continue to
use the support service in the later years may become smaller and less diverse
over time (that is, customers that choose to renew historically are those that
make greater use of the service, thereby increasing the entity’s costs). In
addition, customers tend to use services more if they pay monthly rather than
making an upfront payment. Finally, the entity would incur higher
administration costs such as the costs related to administering renewals and
collection of monthly payments.
55-246 In assessing the guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-17(c), the entity
determines that the payment terms were structured primarily for reasons other
than the provision of finance to the entity. The entity charges a single upfront
amount for the services because other payment terms (such as a monthly
payment plan) would affect the nature of the risks assumed by the entity to
provide the service and may make it uneconomical to provide the service. As a
result of its analysis, the entity concludes that there is not a significant
financing component.


Topic 606 requires an adjustment for the effect of a financing component (time
value of money) if the financing component is significant to the contract. The
requirement to adjust for a significant financing component (i.e. the time value
of money) reflects the fact that:
— entities are not indifferent to the timing of cash flows in a contract (i.e. cash
  now is more valuable than cash later);
— exclusion of the financing component could misrepresent the profit in the
  contract (e.g. a payment made in arrears would result in full profit upon
  transfer of the good or service, even though the entity bears ongoing cost
  of financing to the customer, conversely, a payment made in advance
  would result in the financing cost that the entity incurs being included in
  gross profit from the sale of the good or service); and
— contracts with an explicitly stated interest rate (where interest income is
  recognized) should not be treated differently from contracts with an implied
  interest rate.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     343
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




Identifying a significant financing component
Generally, a contract has a financing component if the promised amount of
consideration differs from the cash-selling price of the promised goods or
services or there is a significant timing difference between when control of the
goods or services is transferred to the customer and when the customer pays
for the goods or services. The financing component may be explicit, where a
stated interest rate is charged, or implied – i.e. the amount of consideration
payable to the entity would differ if the customer paid cash at the same time as
it received the good or service. Whether that financing component is
‘significant’ to the contract and must be factored into the determination of the
transaction price is a matter of judgment.
Two factors should be considered in determining whether a financing
component is significant to the contract:

                                       Relevant facts and circumstances




 a) Difference between the amount of promised consideration and the
    cash selling price


 b) Combined effect of:
     1.Expected length of time between when the entity transfers the promised
       goods or services and when the customer pays

     2.Prevailing interest rates in the relevant market


The significance of a financing component is determined at the contract level
only, rather than for each performance obligation or at an aggregated portfolio
level – i.e. an entity does not evaluate whether the combined effects of
individually insignificant financing components would be material to a portfolio
of contracts or to the entity’s financial statements as a whole.

Even if a financing component is not significant, the TRG members agreed at
the March 2015 meeting that an entity is not precluded from accounting for that
component following the significant financing guidance.
A contract does not have a significant financing component if any of the
following factors exists.

  Factor                                                            Example
  An entity receives an advance                                     A flexible spending arrangement where
  payment, and the timing of the                                    the customer pays the entity a fixed
  transfer of goods or services to a                                amount upfront and the customer draws
  customer is at the discretion of the                              down against that prepaid amount (e.g.
  customer                                                          issues purchase orders to acquire various
                                                                    software licenses and related services) at
                                                                    its discretion over the term of the
                                                                    arrangement.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     344
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




  Factor                                                            Example
  A substantial portion of the                                      A software license transferred to the
  consideration is variable, and the                                customer at contract inception that the
  amount or timing of the consideration                             customer will embed in its products and
  is outside the customer’s or entity’s                             the consideration for the software license
  control                                                           is a sales-based royalty.
  The difference between the amount of                              Protection against the counterparty not
  promised consideration and the cash                               completing its obligations under the
  selling price of the promised goods or                            contract
  services arises for non-finance reasons


Determining whether a difference between the amount of promised
consideration and the cash selling price of the goods or services arises for
reasons other than the provision of finance requires judgment. An entity
considers all relevant facts and circumstances, including whether the difference
is proportionate to any other reason provided – i.e. in addition to having a reason
other than financing, paragraph 606-10-32-17(c) requires the difference between
the promised consideration and the cash selling price of the good or service to
be proportional to the reason for the difference.
A payment in advance or arrears on terms that are typical for the industry and
jurisdiction may have a primary purpose other than financing. For example, a
customer may withhold an amount of consideration that is payable only on
successful completion of the contract or the achievement of a specified
milestone (e.g. successful implementation or customization of software). The
primary purpose of these payment terms, as illustrated in Example 27 of
Topic 606, may be to provide the customer with assurance that the entity will
perform its obligations under the contract, rather than provide financing to the
customer. An entity should monitor practices within its industry and geography
(including its own customary payment terms) and consider documenting how
the payment terms in certain contracts conform to these practices and
whether, if at all, the primary purpose of these practices is other than financing
(e.g. retainage). When considering practices within its industry and geography
(including its own customary payment terms) entities should use current actual
transaction data and contracts with similar terms to the contract under
consideration. Importantly, the fact that payment in advance or arrears is typical
for an industry or in a jurisdiction is not determinative that such payment occurs
for non-finance reasons – i.e. the fact that such payment terms are typical for
the industry or the jurisdiction does not automatically mean there is not a
significant financing component in the contract.
Although it seems that the Boards were attempting to address retention
payments in the construction industry with these observations, this concept
might apply to other situations (e.g. long-term software customization or
implementation projects that may have some characteristics similar to many
long-term construction contracts). The Boards explicitly considered advance
payments received by an entity during their redeliberations – e.g. compensating
the entity for incurring upfront costs – but decided not to exempt entities from
accounting for the time value of money effect of advance payments when the
embedded financing is significant to the contract with the customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     345
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




Accounting for a significant financing component
When a contract includes a significant financing component as a result of an
advance payment to the entity, the accounting effect of the financing
component increases the amount of revenue recognized, with a corresponding
increase to interest expense because the customer has provided financing to
the entity. Conversely, when a contract includes a significant financing
component because the entity receives payments in arrears, the adjustment for
the financing component decreases the amount of revenue recognized with a
corresponding increase to interest income because the entity has provided
financing to the customer.
These effects impact various financial metrics such as EBITDA (earnings before
interest, tax, depreciation and amortization), which may, in turn, affect
compensation and other contractual arrangements.
The effects of a significant financing component are reflected in the entity’s
estimate of the transaction price as either an increase (for advanced payments)
or a decrease (in post-paid scenarios) using a discount rate that reflects the
credit standing of the party receiving the financing (i.e. the entity’s credit
standing for advance payment circumstances and the customer’s credit
standing for payments in arrears).
Determining the effect of the time value of money for a contract with a
significant financing component can be complex for long-term or multiple-
element arrangements. In these contracts:
— goods or services are transferred at various points in time;
— cash payments may be made throughout the contract; and
— there may be a change in the estimated timing of the transfer of goods or
  services to the customer.
If additional variable elements are present in the contract – e.g. contingent
consideration – then these calculations can be even more complicated.
For example, a software entity may offer payment terms that allows customers to
buy software products and pay the cash selling price two years after delivery.
Judgment is required to evaluate whether in these circumstances an entity is
offering a discount or other promotional incentive for customers who pay the cash
selling price at the end of the promotional period equal to the financing charge that
would otherwise have been charged in exchange for financing the purchase.
If the entity concludes that financing has been provided to the customer, then
the transaction price is reduced by the implicit financing amount and interest
income is accreted. The implicit financing amount is calculated using the rate
that would be used in a separate financing transaction between the entity and
its customer commensurate with the customer’s credit standing.


Determining the discount rate
The discount rate to be used in accounting for a significant financing
component:
— is determined at contract inception and is not updated for changes in
  interest rates or changes in facts or circumstances, such as the customer’s



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     346
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



      or the entity’s credit standing (however, the discount rate is updated if
      there is a contract modification not accounted for as a separate contract
      and a significant financing component is determined to exist in the modified
      contract); and
— is the rate that would be reflected in a separate financing transaction
  between the entity and the customer, reflecting the credit characteristics of
  the party (i.e. the entity or the customer) receiving the financing.
For payments received in advance of the transfer of the goods or services to
the customer, the discount rate used should reflect the creditworthiness of the
entity. Conversely, for payments received in arrears (i.e. after the transfer of the
goods or services to the customer), the discount rate used should reflect the
creditworthiness of the customer and any effect on the rate (presumably
downward) if collateral or other security is provided by the customer.


Presentation of the effects of the time value of
money
An entity should present the effects of the financing component (i.e. the
unwinding of the discount) separately from revenue from customers as interest
income or interest expense. The unwinding of the discount should not be an
element of revenue from customers because contracts with financing
components that are significant to the contract have two separate economic
features: one relating to the transfer of goods or services (revenue from
customers) and the other relating to the financing component (interest expense
or income). The Boards noted that some entities regularly enter into financing
transactions and, therefore, interest represents income arising from ordinary
activities for those entities. Topic 606 does not preclude an entity from
presenting interest as a type of revenue in circumstances in which the interest
represents income from the entity’s ordinary activities.


Practical expedient to adjusting for a significant
financing component
Paragraph 606-10-32-18 states that an entity is not required to make an
adjustment if, at contract inception, the entity does not expect the period
between payment by the customer of the consideration promised and the
transfer of control of the promised good or service to the customer to exceed
one year. This exception applies regardless of whether control of goods or
services occurs before payment is made or payment occurs before transfer of
the goods or services.
For contracts with an overall duration greater than one year, the practical
expedient applies if the period between performance and payment for that
performance is one year or less.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     347
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                                               Significant financing component?




                Interest expense                  Practical expedient available                   Interest income




   Payment in                                                                                                     Payment in
    advance                                                         t0
                                                                                                                    arrears
                                   t-12 months                                      t+12 months



                                                           Performance




In a contract with two or more performance obligations, identifying the period
between customer payment and the transfer of goods or services may present
challenges, especially when the performance obligations are satisfied at
different points in time and consideration is paid over time or all at once.


Illustrative examples

                  Illustrative Example D1
                  Time value of money in a single performance
                  obligation arrangement
ABC Corp. enters into a contract to transfer a license to Software Product A to
Customer for an upfront cash payment of $300,000. At contract inception, ABC
expects to deliver Software Product A to Customer in two years and
determines that the contract has a significant financing component. ABC’s
borrowing rate is 5%.
At contract inception, ABC recognizes a contract liability of $300,000 for the
cash received. Over the two years, ABC recognizes interest expense and
increases its contract liability by $15,000a in year 1 and $15,750b in year 2. At
the end of the two-year period when it transfers control of Software Product A
to Customer, ABC recognizes revenue of $330,750c.
Notes:
a. $300,000 × 5% = $15,000.
b. ($300,000 + $15,000) × 5% = $15,750.
c. $300,000 + $15,000 + $15,750 = $330,750.



                  Illustrative Example D2
                  Time value of money in a multiple-element
                  arrangement
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer licenses to Software
Product X and Software Product Y for $150,000 payable upfront. The license to




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     348
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Software Product X will be transferred in two years, and the license to Software
Product Y will be transferred in five years.
ABC determines that the contract contains two performance obligations that
are satisfied at the points in time at which the licenses are transferred to
Customer. ABC allocates the $150,000 to the Software Products X and Y
licenses at amounts of $37,500 and $112,500, respectively – i.e. based on their
relative stand-alone selling prices. ABC concludes that the contract contains a
significant financing component and that a financing rate of 6% is appropriate
based on ABC’s credit-standing at contract inception.
ABC accounts for the contract as follows.

  Contract inception                   Recognize a contract liability for the payment of $150,000

                                       During the two years from contract inception until the
                                       transfer of the license to Software Product X, recognize
                                       interest expense of $9,000 and $9,540(a) on $150,000 at 6%
  Years 1 and 2                        for Years 1 and 2, respectively, for a cumulative interest
                                       expense of $18,540
                                       Recognize revenue of $42,135(b) for the transfer of the
                                       license of Software Product X
                                       Recognize annual interest expense of $7,584, $8,039 and
                                       $8,522(c) for Years 3, 4 and 5, respectively, based on the
  Years 3, 4 and 5                     contract liability at the beginning of Year 3 of $126,405(d)
                                       Recognize revenue of $150,550(e) for the transfer of the
                                       license to Software Product Y

Notes:
a. Calculated as $150,000 × 6% for Year 1 and $159,000 × 6% for Year 2.
b. Calculated as $37,500 + $4,635, being the initial allocation to Product X license
   plus Product X’s portion of the interest for Years 1 and 2 of the contract ($37,500 ÷
   $150,000 × $18,540).
c. Calculated as $126,405(d) × 6% = $7,584; ($126,405 + $7,584) × 6%= $8,039;
   and ($126,405 + $7,584 + $8,039) × 6% = $8,522.
d. Calculated as $150,000 + $18,540 − $42,135, being the initial contract liability plus
   interest for two years less the amount derecognized from the transfer of the
   license to Product X.
e. Calculated as $126,405 + $24,145, being the contract liability balance after
   two years plus interest for three years.



                  Illustrative Example D3
                  Determining whether an arrangement has a
                  significant financing component – Payment in
                  advance
SaaS Company signs a three-year, non-cancellable agreement with Customer to
provide SaaS. Customer may elect to either pay:
a. $140 per month (total payment is $5,040); or
b. $4,200 at the beginning of the contract term, with no additional monthly
   payments.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                          349
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



The contract includes a financing component.
The difference in pricing between option (a) and option (b), together with the
timing difference between when Customer will pay the promised consideration
and SaaS Company’s provision of the SaaS under option (b), indicates that the
contractual payment terms under option (b) have the primary purpose of
providing SaaS Company with financing. The cash-selling price is the monthly
fee of $140 because it reflects the amount due when the monthly hosting
services are provided to Customer. A comparison of the payment terms
between options (a) and (b) indicates the total cumulative interest of $840 and
an implied discount rate of 13%.
SaaS Company considers if factors indicating that a significant financing
component does not exist apply in this case and concludes that they do not.
SaaS Company determines that the financing component is significant because
the difference between the cumulative cash-selling price of $5,040 and the
financed amounts of $4,200 is $840, or 20% of the financed amount. Therefore,
an adjustment to reflect the time value of money will be needed if Customer
elects option (b) to pay at the beginning of the contract.
SaaS Company evaluates whether the implied discount rate of 13% is
consistent with the market rate of interest for companies with the same credit
rating as its own. Assuming that it is, SaaS Company recognizes revenue of
$5,040 ratably over the contract term as the performance obligation is satisfied
and interest expense of $840 using the effective interest method. The amount
of interest expense to recognize each period is based on the projected contract
liability, which decreases as services are provided and increases for the accrual
of interest.
Below is one example interest calculation under the effective interest method.

                                                                                     Interest
                               Contract                                          expense at
                              liability –             Transaction                     1.083%                      Contract
                           beginning of             price/delivery            (Monthly rate =               liability – End
 Period                          month                  of service                 13% ÷ 12)                     of month
                                                                               (A-B) × 1.083%
 SaaS                                        A                          B                  =C                      A–B+C
 1                                   $4,200                       $140                           $44                   $4,104
 2                                     4,104                        140                            43                    4,007
 3                                     4,007                        140                            42                    3,909
 4                                     3,909                        140                            41                    3,810
 5                                     3,810                        140                            40                    3,710
                         Continue for each period…
 36                                     $140                      $140                             $0                           $0

If, in the above example, the implied discount rate of 13% was determined to
be an above-market rate, then the transaction price would be adjusted to reflect
a market rate, based on SaaS Company’s creditworthiness (i.e. because it is the
party receiving the financing in this contract). The difference between the
implied discount rate and the market rate would represent a discount granted to




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     350
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



the customer for purposes other than financing; that discount would (1) reduce
the amount of revenue recognized – i.e. to an amount less than $5,040 – and (2)
reduce the amount of interest expense recognized by SaaS Company over the
contract term (i.e. because the revenue amount is reduced, the difference
between the cash paid and the revenue to be recognized, reflected as interest
expense, is smaller).



                  Illustrative Example D4
                  Determining whether an arrangement has a
                  significant financing component – Payment in
                  arrears
ABC Corp. enters into a contract to transfer a software license to Customer
priced at $2,000,000. Customer is a start-up entity with limited cash, and ABC
agrees that Customer can pay for the license over two years through monthly
installments of $92,000.
The contract includes a financing component. The difference in pricing between
the selling price of $2,000,000 and the total of the monthly payments of
$2,208,000 (24 × $92,000), together with the timing difference between when
Customer will pay the promised consideration and ABC’s transfer of the
license, indicates that the contractual payment terms have the primary purpose
of providing Customer with financing. The cash-selling price is $2,000,000
because it reflects the amount due at the point in time the license is transferred
to Customer. A comparison of the cash selling price and the total payments to
be received indicates the total cumulative interest of $208,000 and an implied
interest rate of 9.7%.
ABC considers if factors indicating that a significant financing component does
not exist are present and concludes that they do not. ABC determines that the
financing component is significant because the difference between the cash-
selling price of $2,000,000 and the total promised consideration of $2,208,000
is $208,000, or 10.4% of the financed amount. Therefore, an adjustment to
reflect the time value of money is needed.
ABC evaluates whether the implied interest rate of 9.7% is consistent with the
market rate of interest for companies with the same credit-standing as Customer.
Assuming that it is, ABC recognizes revenue of $2,000,000 upon transfer of the
software license – i.e. when the performance obligation is satisfied – and interest
income on a monthly basis using the effective interest method. The amount of
interest income for each month is based on the balance of the receivable for
software license sold, which decreases as payments are received.
The following is one example interest calculation under the effective interest
method.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                          351
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                                                                              Interest income
                           Receivable –                  Monthly                      at 0.81%
                           Beginning of               payment −               (Monthly rate =                Receivable –
 Period                         month               End of month                    9.7% ÷ 12)              End of month
 SaaS                                        A                         B        A × 0.81% = C                      A–B+C
 1                             $2,000,000                     $92,000                     $16,143                $1,924,143
 2                               1,924,143                     92,000                       15,531                1,847,674
 3                               1,847,674                     92,000                       14,913                1,770,587
 4                               1,770,587                     92,000                       14,291                1,692,878
 5                               1,692,878                     92,000                       13,664                1,614,542
                         Continue for each period…
 24                                $91,263                    $92,000                          $737                             $0

If, in the above example, the implied interest rate of 9.7% was determined to
be a below-market rate, then the transaction price would be adjusted to reflect
a market rate, based on Customer’s creditworthiness. The difference between
the implied interest rate and the market rate would represent a discount
granted to the customer for purposes other than financing, reducing the amount
of revenue recognized for the license and increasing the amount of interest
income to reflect a market rate of interest.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Advance payments
Amounts that do not require repayment in the future, but that will instead be
applied to the purchase price of the property, goods or services involved, were
excluded from the requirement to impute interest under legacy US GAAP. This
is because the liability – i.e. deferred revenue – is not a financial liability.
The requirements under Topic 606 when a significant financing component exists
are therefore a change from legacy US GAAP because they will result in the
entity recognizing more revenue than the cash received from the customer, and
therefore, more revenue and more interest expense than what was recognized
under legacy US GAAP for the same arrangements. This change may particularly
affect software entities with contracts in which payment is received significantly
before the transfer of control of goods or services – e.g. software licensing
entities that bundle several years of PCS or hosting services in arrangements
with payments received at the outset or in the early stages of a contract or SaaS
providers that receive upfront payments in long-term SaaS arrangements (e.g. if a
customer pays for a three-year SaaS arrangement in advance or pays a significant
upfront fee that relates to services that will be provided over an extended period
of time).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     352
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Accounting for financing components for payments in arrears may be
more frequent
Under legacy US GAAP, extended payment terms could result in a conclusion
that revenue was not fixed or determinable, which would preclude revenue
recognition before payments became due and payable. In those cases, entities
did not account for a financing element.
Under Topic 606, the transaction price is estimated and a separate evaluation
is performed to determine whether the payment terms provide financing to
the customer. As a result, the accounting for financing in arrangements where
the customer pays in arrears will likely arise more frequently. This accounting
will result in a decrease in revenue and an increase in interest income as
compared to similar arrangements under legacy US GAAP; however, it also will
accelerate when the decreased total amount of revenue is recognized since
revenue will no longer be recognized on a ‘due and payable’ basis for many of
these arrangements.



                  Question D230
                  Is the assessment of whether a financing
                  component is ‘significant’ to a contract a
                  quantitative or qualitative assessment?
Interpretive response: Once a financing component is determined to exist
(e.g. none of the factors in paragraph 606-10-32-17 exist), it may or may not be
‘significant’. And neither Topic 606, nor the basis for conclusions to any of the
revenue ASUs, address explicitly how to determine whether a financing
component is significant. However, discussions of the term ‘material’ that are
included in the basis for conclusions to ASUs 2014-09 and 2016-10 state that
‘material’ takes both qualitative and quantitative factors into consideration – e.g.
in determining whether a customer option provides the customer with a
material right or whether a promised good or service is ‘immaterial in the
context of the contract’.
Therefore, it is, in some respects, conspicuous that ‘significant’ was the
threshold selected for assessing financing components, indicating an intent to
depart from the qualitative and quantitative nature of the term ‘material’.
Consequently, we believe ‘significant’, at least in the context of determining
whether a financing component is significant, is principally a quantitative
analysis.
Further, because the Boards did not provide guidance on what quantitative
amounts would be significant, judgment will be required to determine at what
point a financing component becomes significant to the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     353
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Question D240
                  Does an entity need to evaluate whether there is a
                  significant financing component in a long-term
                  contract that transfers a software license to the
                  customer at a point in time for which the
                  consideration is a sales- or usage-based royalty?
Interpretive response: It depends. Paragraph 606-10-32-17(b) states that a
contract with a customer does not have a significant financing component if a
substantial amount of the consideration promised by the customer is variable
and the amount or timing of that consideration varies on the basis of the
occurrence or nonoccurrence of a future event that is not substantially within
the control of the customer or the entity (e.g. if the consideration is a sales-
based royalty).
Therefore, a significant financing component does not exist when a software
license is transferred upfront, but all or a substantial portion of the consideration
for that license is in the form of a sales-based royalty, or a usage-based royalty
whereby the usage giving rise to the usage-based fee is dictated by third-party
actions – e.g. the customer’s customers’ use of the platform or transaction
activity – or outside events or circumstances (e.g. usage of the software
depends on the occurrence of weather phenomena or changes in a stock
market index).
In contrast, a usage-based fee whereby usage is ‘within the control of the
customer or the entity’ would not qualify for application of the guidance in
paragraph 606-10-32-17(b).



                  Question D250
                  Do extended payment terms result in a significant
                  financing component?


  Extended payment terms
  Extended payment terms in software arrangements have generally been
  defined as those in which payment of a significant portion of the license fee
  is not required until more than 12 months after software delivery; however,
  they can include any payment terms that are elongated from the entity’s
  customary payment terms.


Interpretive response: The existence of extended payment terms will generally
lead to a conclusion that there is a financing component in the contract. Contract-
specific facts and circumstances will affect whether that financing component is
significant to the contract. However as a result of the practical expedient, entities
need not consider whether extended payment terms of less than 12 months
(i.e. those that are beyond an entity’s customary payment terms, but less than
12 months) include a significant financing component.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     354
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



If the entity expects to provide a refund or other concession to the customer as
a result of the extended payment terms, the entity should account for the
expected concession as outlined in Question D150.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

See Question D150.



                  Question D260
                  What is the accounting if an entity applies the
                  12-month practical expedient not to account for a
                  significant financing component but subsequently
                  changes its expectation that customer payment
                  and/or its performance will not occur within
                  12 months?
Interpretive response: Paragraph 606-10-32-18 provides that an entity is not
required to make an adjustment if, at contract inception, the entity does not
expect the period between payment by the customer of the consideration
promised and the transfer of control of the promised good or service to the
customer to exceed one year. Therefore, it is possible that the entity’s
expectation of payment by the customer, or transfer of control of the promised
good or service, within one year may not be achieved. For example:
— A customer may prepay a software entity to customize or implement
  software, or to deliver a specified upgrade or enhancement. The entity may
  expect to complete those services or transfer the specified upgrade or
  enhancement in less than a year from receipt of the prepayment, but later,
  due to unforeseen circumstances, conclude that it will not meet that
  expected timeline.
— The terms of a contract may require the customer to pay for a suite of
  professional services only upon completion. The entity may expect to
  provide all of the services in less than a year, such that the customer’s
  payment will be within one year of the performance of all services, but later
  concludes that it will not complete the services within one year. In that
  case, the customer will pay for some services performed shortly after
  contract inception more than one year after those services were provided.
Paragraph 606-10-32-18 is explicit to the timing of the assessment (i.e. ‘at
contract inception’) and, unlike the guidance on collectibility (see paragraph 606-
10-25-5), the remainder of the guidance on significant financing components
makes no mention of reassessing the applicability of the practical expedient.
Consequently, we do not believe an entity is required to reassess the
applicability of the practical expedient other than if there is a contract
modification that is not accounted for as a separate contract (see Chapter G –
Contract modifications). However, we also do not believe that the guidance




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     355
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



precludes an entity from doing so when there are significant changes in the
timing of either the cash consideration or the transfer of control of goods or
services in the arrangement.
The preceding paragraph notwithstanding, facts and circumstances may arise
which indicate the entity’s earlier conclusion that the customer payment or entity
performance would meet the 12-month practical expedient was attributable to a
misunderstanding of the facts and circumstances that existed at contract
inception and were reasonably available to management at that time, leading to
the entity inappropriately ignoring a significant financing component. In that case,
the entity would have an accounting error and would need to assess the
materiality of the error and any related correction to current and prior periods to
determine the appropriate process for correcting the error in accordance with
Topic 250, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections. See chapter 4 of KPMG
Handbook, Accounting changes and error corrections, for additional guidance on
error corrections.



                  Question D270
                  Is the transaction price of a software contract with
                  a customer with standard payment terms affected
                  when the customer obtains financing from a third
                  party unrelated to the software entity?
Interpretive response: No. A software entity would not have to determine
whether the contract contains a significant financing component based on how
its customer obtains funds to pay the fees to which the software entity is
entitled under the contract.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy US GAAP (paragraphs 985-605-55-33 through 35) concluded that a
customer’s use of third party financing unrelated to the software entity would
not affect the software entity’s revenue recognition in the arrangement, which
is consistent with how we view the effect of those third-party financing
arrangements under Topic 606.



                  Question D280
                  Is the transaction price of a software contract with
                  a customer with standard (i.e. non-extended)
                  payment terms affected where the software entity
                  participates in the customer’s financing?
Interpretive response: In circumstances where the customer of the software
entity obtains external financing (i.e. not directly from the software entity), but
the software entity participates in that financing (e.g. provides financial



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     356
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



guarantees or indemnifications to the financing party, or establishes the
creditworthiness of the customer to the financing party), the entity would first
evaluate whether any guarantee is in the scope of Topic 460, Guarantees and
should, therefore, be accounted for as an element of the contract outside the
scope of Topic 606 (see paragraphs 606-10-15-2 and 606-10-15-4). However, if
the entity’s participation is in a form other than providing a guarantee to the
financing party that is in the scope of Topic 460, the entity’s participation
creates a risk that the software entity may provide a concession either to the
customer or the financing party. Questions D130 and D150 (as well as
Question C90) address the issue of potential concessions, including those
resulting from extended payment terms, under Topic 606.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Accounting for scenarios where the software entity participated in its
customer’s financing was more complex under legacy US GAAP than under
Topic 606. Legacy US GAAP (paragraphs 985-605-55-36 and 55-37) stipulated
that if the software entity’s participation in the customer’s financing resulted in
incremental risk that the software entity would provide a refund or concession
to either the end-user customer or the financing party, the presumption was
that the fee was not fixed or determinable. If the software entity was unable to
overcome that presumption, the software entity would recognize revenue as
payments from the customer became due and payable to the financing party,
provided all other requirements for revenue recognition were met. The software
entity accounted for any proceeds received from the customer or the financing
party before revenue recognition as a liability for deferred revenue. Therefore, a
software entity had to engage in the multiple-step process of first determining
whether the entity was participating in customer financing, then assessing
whether that participation resulted in incremental risk that the entity would
provide a refund or concession to either the customer or the financing party,
and finally concluding whether it could overcome the presumption that the fees
in these circumstances were not fixed or determinable.
An entity could overcome the presumption that the fees in the arrangement
were not fixed or determinable if there were evidence that the software entity
had a standard business practice of entering into similar arrangements with
financing parties that have substantially similar provisions, and had a history of
not providing refunds or concessions to the customer or the financing party
(paragraphs 985-605-55-42 through 55-45).
Under Topic 606, whether a fee is fixed or determinable is not a criterion for
recognizing revenue. Any risk presented by customer financing (i.e. other than
that addressed by Topic 460 for guarantees within its scope) is accounted for by
the variable consideration model, including the risk for refund or concession, or
the guidance on identifying performance obligations (i.e. if there is a risk of
providing a concession in the form of a good or service). If payments to which
the entity expects to be entitled are extended, then they would be analyzed for
a significant financing component. Therefore, entities may recognize revenue
under Topic 606 sooner for arrangements in which the entity participates in the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     357
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



customer’s financing and the fees were determined not to be fixed or
determinable under legacy US GAAP.



                  Question D290
                  Does a prepayment in advance of scheduled
                  payments result in a change to the transaction price
                  for a contract that contains a significant financing
                  component?
Interpretive response: No. The objective in Topic 606 when adjusting the
transaction price for a significant financing component is for the entity to
recognize revenue at an amount that reflects what the cash selling price would
have been if the customer had paid cash for the promised goods or services at
the point that they are transferred to the customer. Therefore, the time value of
money adjustment determined at contract inception based on the stated
payment terms would continue, in the event of customer prepayments in
advance of contractual payment dates, to reflect the economic substance of the
transaction. Topic 606 effectively presumes that the total consideration in the
contract would have been less had the stated payment terms reflected an earlier
payment date. The fact that the customer decided to prepay its obligation to the
entity does not alter the financing component in the contract because that
financing component still provided the same value to the customer.
Frequently, a customer decision to prepay the remaining scheduled payments
will be accompanied by a contract modification. That modification may involve
solely a change in the total amount of cash the customer will pay (i.e. a
modification to the note receivable) or may involve additional changes to the
performance obligations in the contract (e.g. in return for the prepayment, the
customer may receive additional goods or services). In the former case, a
modification to a receivable (e.g. decreasing the total cash to be paid in
exchange for the prepayment) would generally follow the guidance in
Topic 310, Receivables, applicable to creditors upon the modification or
extinguishment of a customer debt instrument. In the latter case, the entity
would likely have to consider both the guidance in Topic 310 and the contract
modification guidance in Topic 606 (see Chapter G – Contract modifications).
However, if the contract is not modified (i.e. the terms of the contract permit
customer early payment), using Illustrative Example D4, in general, the effect of
a customer prepayment of scheduled amounts will be to eliminate any
remaining receivable from the customer, with the difference between the
balance of the receivable and the cash received recognized as some form of
‘other income’. It would not be appropriate in our view to recognize additional
product or service revenue from the prepayment because the customer’s
prepayment does not alter the financing that was provided to the customer
when entering into the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     358
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, in an extended payment terms scenario where the
entity should only recognize revenue as the payments became due and payable,
an entity would recognize revenue at the time any prepayments were received
(i.e. before they were due and payable under the terms of the original contract)
provided all other revenue recognition criteria were met (paragraph 985-605-55-
15). In other words, a customer’s prepayment would change the timing of
revenue recognition from that which would have resulted from the customer
paying as permitted under the contract.
In contrast, under Topic 606, customer prepayments generally will not affect
the timing of revenue recognition. One possible exception to this conclusion
would be if the entity is applying the alternative recognition model outlined in
paragraph 606-10-25-7, which applies when there is not a contract within the
scope of the revenue model, in accordance with which cash being received can
directly affect the amount of revenue recognized (see Chapter B – Step 1:
Identify the contract with the customer).



                  Question D300
                  Does a multi-year contract with annual
                  prepayments qualify for the practical expedient?

Interpretive response: It depends. If a long-term contract (e.g. a three-year
contract for SaaS, PCS or hosting services) requires the customer to pay for
each year of service in advance, the contract will generally qualify for the
practical expedient provided the prepayment relates solely to goods or services
that will be provided over the year following the prepayment. This is because, in
such cases, the difference between when the payment is made and transfer of
the goods or services to which the payment relates is one year or less.
In contrast, if a prepayment relates to both a service to be provided over the
next year following the payment and another service that will be provided to the
customer over a longer period (e.g. a prepayment that relates to both an
implementation service that will be provided over the first six months of the
contract and three years of PCS), the practical expedient cannot be applied.



                  Question D310
                  Does a contract with a payment that is due more
                  than one year before, or one year after, delivery of
                  the related goods or services qualify for the
                  practical expedient?
Interpretive response: No. If payment for a good or service is due more than
one year before or one year after the transfer of the goods or services to the
customer (e.g. the entity has the right to invoice the customer one year from




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     359
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



the date the customer receives goods or services and the invoice has 30-day
payment terms), the entity would not be able to apply the practical expedient
because the time between the transfer of the goods or services and the
expected payment date exceeds one year.
An entity is also not able to use the practical expedient if the performance
obligation to which the payment relates is satisfied over time and no payments
are due until more than one year after some or all of the services have been
performed. For example, if professional services transferred to the customer
over time will be provided over a six-month period and no payments are due
until nine months after the services are completed, the practical expedient
would not apply. In that case, the entity is transferring services to the customer
during months one-three of the six-month service period that will not be paid for
until more than one year after those services are performed.



                  Example D310.1
                  Application of the practical expedient
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer a license to
Software Product J and provide implementation services. Customer will pay
ABC in full for the software license and the implementation services (1 million)
upon transfer of the software license. The implementation services are
expected to take approximately 15 months to complete. The software license
and the implementation services are separate performance obligations. The
software license is transferred to Customer at a point in time (see
Question F20) and the implementation services performance obligation will be
satisfied over time as the services are performed (see Question F180).
The practical expedient does not apply because the payment relates, in part, to
services that will be provided more than 12 months after the payment from
Customer is made. As discussed in Question D330, it is also not appropriate to
exclude the financing effect applicable to the first 12 months of the
implementation services period when either (a) determining if a significant
financing component exists or (b) calculating the accounting effect of the
significant financing component (if there is one) on the transaction price for
the contract.



                  Question D320
                  For contracts with multiple performance
                  obligations, how should payments be allocated to
                  the performance obligations for purposes of
                  determining whether a significant financing
                  component exists or whether the practical
                  expedient is applicable?
Interpretive response: In a contract with two or more performance obligations,
identifying the period between customer payment and the transfer of goods or
services may present challenges, especially when the performance obligations



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                       360
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



are satisfied at different points in time and consideration is paid over time or all
at once.
In some contracts that include consideration paid over time, one performance
obligation is satisfied in the early stages of a contract, while a second
performance obligation continues for an extended period of time. In such cases,
the entity will generally allocate each payment received to both performance
obligations in the contract on a pro rata basis (using relative stand-alone selling
prices) to calculate the financing component and determine whether the
practical expedient applies. That is, allocating payments as they are made to a
single performance obligation (e.g. a hardware product or software license that
is the first performance obligation transferred to the customer under the
contract) until it has been fully paid (i.e. a ‘first-in first-out’, or FIFO, allocation
method) would not be appropriate under Topic 606. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 30]



                  Example D320.1
                  Allocation of customer payments
SaaS Provider enters into a three-year, non-cancellable SaaS arrangement with
Customer. In addition to providing three years’ access to its hosted application,
SaaS provider will also provide various implementation services, which will be
completed over a four-six months’ period before ‘go-live’. The SaaS and the
implementation services are determined to be separate performance
obligations (see Question C280), and both performance obligations are
determined to be satisfied over time (see Questions F130 and F190).
In return for the SaaS and the implementation services, Customer will make
three payments of $120, the first of which is due at the ‘go-live’ date and the
remaining two payments are due on the first and second anniversaries of the
go-live date. The stand-alone selling price for the three-year SaaS is $360, while
the stand-alone selling price of the implementation services is $40. Therefore,
the relative stand-alone selling prices for the SaaS and implementation services
are $324 ([$360 ÷ $400] × $360) and $36 ([$40 ÷ $400] × $360), respectively.
SaaS Provider concludes that, in determining whether the contract contains a
significant financing component and whether the practical expedient applies,
the annual payments should be allocated as follows (rounded).

                                                                                                        Implementation
                                                                                   SaaS                       services
 Payment 1 (go-live)                                                                $108                                    $12
 Payment 2 (1 year after go-live)                                                   $108                                    $12
 Payment 3 (2 year after go-live)                                                   $108                                    $12




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                         361
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



In contrast, it would not be appropriate to allocate the payments as follows.

                                                                                                        Implementation
                                                                                   SaaS                       services
 Payment 1 (go-live)                                                                $ 84                                    $36
 Payment 2 (1 year after go-live)                                                   $120                                        -
 Payment 3 (2 year after go-live)                                                   $120                                        -

Based on the appropriate allocation of the customer payments, the practical
expedient does not apply. The implementation services will be paid for by
Customer over a period of more than two years. Because there is a difference
in timing between performance of the implementation services and payment
for those services (i.e. the services will be provided in the first four-six months
after contract inception, but will be paid for over 24 months after the
completion of those services), the contract includes a financing component.
However, SaaS Provider concludes that the financing component that exists is
not significant to the contract. This is because, if an interest element were to be
calculated with respect to the implementation services based on the relative
stand-alone selling price for those services and an appropriate discount rate
(assume 12% reflects an appropriate discount rate considering the credit
characteristics of Customer), that amount is less than $4 (i.e. only
approximately 1% of the $360 total contract price), which is calculated as the
difference between $36 paid in full upon completion of the implementation
services and $36 paid in three equal installments after completion of the
implementation services (as per the table above).
Although a financing component exists in the contract, it is not deemed to be
significant to the contract and, therefore, the transaction price of the contract is
not adjusted for the effect of the financing component.



                  Question D330
                  When determining whether a financing component
                  is significant to the contract, can an entity exclude
                  the effect of payments made within 12 months from
                  the transfer of the related goods or services?
Interpretive response: No. Topic 606 includes a practical expedient permitting
entities to ignore the effects of a financing component if the period between
when the entity transfers a good or service and when the customer pays for
that good or service is less than one year. Therefore, some stakeholders have
suggested that entities should be able to ignore the financing effect of
payments made within 12 months from the transfer of the related goods or
services when determining the significance of a financing component even
when additional payments for that good or service will be made more than
12 months from the transfer of that good or service.
We do not believe it is appropriate to exclude the effect of payments for goods
or services that are made within 12 months from the transfer of those goods or
services when additional payments for those goods or services will not be



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     362
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



made within 12 months from their transfer. For example, if a three-year SaaS
contract is entirely prepaid, it would be inappropriate to ignore any financing
provided by that prepayment during the first year of the contract.



                  Example D330.1
                  Calculation of the financing component
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer a three-year license
to Software Product F and co-terminus technical support services and
unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights. In return for the license and
the services in this contract, Customer will make 36 monthly payments in
advance of $100 each. ABC concludes that the technical support and the
unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement rights are a single PCS performance
obligation (see Question C150), while the software license and the PCS are
separate performance obligations (see Question C170). The relative stand-alone
selling prices for the software license and the PCS are $2,160 and $1,440,
respectively. Consequently, each monthly payment is allocated $60 to the
software license and $40 to the PCS for purposes of determining whether the
practical expedient applies and whether a significant financing component
exists (see Question D320). The software license is transferred to Customer at
contract inception.
Because there is a difference in timing between the transfer of the license and
payment for those services (i.e. the license is transferred at contract inception,
but will be paid for over 36 months), the contract includes a financing component.
ABC concludes that the practical expedient does not apply because payments
related to the license, for which control is transferred to Customer at contract
inception, extend beyond one year.
In calculating whether the financing component is significant to the contract,
ABC imputes an interest rate of 14%. ABC calculates the significance of the
financing component in the contract on the basis of an interest element of
$384, calculated as the difference between:
— the relative stand-alone selling price for the software license of $2,160; and
— the present value of 36 monthly payments of $60 ($1,776), which equals
  10.7% of the total contract price.
It would be inappropriate for ABC to exclude the first year effect of the
financing component – i.e. the difference between $720 and the present value
of the first 12 monthly payments of $60 attributable to the software license
from the interest element determination. In that case, the interest element
would have been $340 (rather than $384), which would be 9.4% of the total
contract price.
ABC concludes that the contract includes a significant financing component.
ABC considers all the following in reaching its conclusion:
— The present value of the promised consideration had payment occurred
  concurrently with transfer of control ($3,126) is less than the promised
  consideration in the contract ($3,600)




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     363
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



— The length of time between ABC transferring control of the software
  license and Customer paying for the software license is 36 months.
— The interest element calculated is consistent with prevailing interest rates
  in the relevant market considering Customer’s credit standing.
— The consideration is not variable and the nature of the arrangement does
  not contain any non-finance reasons for the difference in the amount of
  promised consideration and the cash selling price of the software license
  and services in the contract.
Consequently, ABC recognizes $1,776 in software license revenue at the point
in time it transfers control of the license to Software Product F and recognizes
$384 in interest income over the 36-month term of the contract.



                  Question D335
                  Can a significant financing component exist
                  because of a material right?

Interpretive response: Yes. When a contract contains a material right, the TRG
members agreed at the March 2015 meeting that an entity needs to consider
whether a significant financing component exists as a result of the material
right just like any other performance obligation. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 32]
A significant financing component does not exist if a customer pays for a good
or service in advance and the timing of the transfer of those goods or services
is at the discretion of the customer (see paragraph 606-10-32-17(a)). In many
cases, a material right will meet this exception because the customer chooses
when to exercise that right. However, in some cases the customer may lack
discretion and therefore the material right would not meet the exception.
Entities should also consider the practical expedient for when, at contract
inception, the entity does not expect the period between payment and transfer
of the promised goods or services to exceed one year (see paragraph 606-10-
32-18 and Questions D300 and D310 on the practical expedient to adjusting for
a significant financing component).



                  Question D340
                  Under what circumstances, if any, would an entity
                  use a discount rate that is not entity- or customer-
                  specific?
Interpretive response: Many companies enter into a large volume of contracts
that, based on payment terms, may contain a financing component that is
significant to the contract. Paragraph 606-10-10-4 provides for a practical
expedient that allows entities to apply the guidance in Topic 606 to a portfolio of
contracts (or performance obligations) that have similar characteristics if by
doing so the entity reasonably expects the result of applying the guidance at the
portfolio level would not differ materially from applying the guidance at the
individual contract level.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     364
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



The entity may, for example, apply a discount rate to a portfolio of contracts
with similar characteristics (e.g. duration, credit quality and risk of obsolescence
of underlying goods or services promised). The entity would need to ensure
that new contracts are assigned to the appropriate portfolio based on common
characteristics including discount rates and payment structures. An entity would
be required to support that the results are not expected to be materially
different from applying the guidance to the individual contract.



                   Question D341
                   Is it appropriate to use a risk-free rate as the
                   discount rate?
Interpretive response: Generally, no. The Boards decided that using a risk-free
rate would not result in useful information because the resulting interest rate
would not reflect the characteristics of the parties to the contract -- i.e. if the
entity provides the customer financing, the entity likely would charge more for
the financing when the customer’s creditworthiness is lower. However, if the
contract is with a customer where the risk-free rate reflects the characteristics
of the parties, it could be an appropriate rate (e.g. a contract with the US
government). [ASU 2014-09.BC239]



                   Question D342
                   Is using an interest rate that is explicitly specified in
                   the contract appropriate?
Interpretive response: Not always. It may not be appropriate to use an interest
rate that is explicitly specified in the contract, because the entity might offer
below-market financing as a marketing incentive. Consequently, an entity
applies the rate that would be used in a separate financing transaction between
the entity and its customer (e.g. a financing transaction where the entity does
not transfer goods or services to the customer).
This can lead to practical difficulties for entities with large volumes of customer
contracts or multinational operations, because they will have to determine a
specific discount rate for each customer, class of customer or geographical
region of customer when a contract contains a significant financing component.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     365
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                   Question D343
                   How should an entity account for an explicitly
                   stated interest rate it charges a customer when the
                   contract does not include a significant financing
                   component?
Interpretive response: Generally, we believe that charging an explicit interest
rate in contracts with customers might indicate that the financing component is
significant from a qualitative standpoint. In this case, an entity should consider
whether the quantitative aspects outweigh the qualitative evidence when
determining whether the financing component is significant.
However, based on other quantitative measures, it is possible for a contract
that includes an explicitly stated interest rate to not include a significant
financing component (see Question D230).
For such a contract, we believe it would be acceptable to recognize and present
the interest component in a manner similar to when the contract has a
significant financing component as interest income separate from revenue from
customers. In doing so, either of the following rates could be used to determine
the amount of interest income:
1. the interest rate that would be used if the contract had a significant
   financing component (i.e. imputed rate); or
2. the explicitly stated interest rate.
Notwithstanding the above, if the fee is more akin to variable consideration –
e.g. the balance is expected to be paid over a relatively short period of time or
the interest is akin to a prompt payment discount discussed in Question D160 –
it may also be acceptable to include the amount in the transaction price.
Entities should apply its approach consistently to similar contracts.



                   Question D344
                   Could a contract with an implied interest rate of
                   zero contain a financing component?
Interpretive response: Yes. When the consideration to be received for a good
or service with extended payment terms is the same as the cash selling price,
the implied interest rate is zero. However, a significant financing component
may still exist. The difference between the promised consideration for a good
or service and the cash selling price is only one factor to consider in making this
determination. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 30]
For example, an entity may offer a promotional incentive that allows customers
to buy items for a zero interest rate. Judgment is required to evaluate whether
a financing component is present.
If the entity concludes that significant financing has been provided to the
customer, then the transaction price is reduced by the implicit financing amount
and interest income is accreted. The implicit financing amount is calculated




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     366
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



using the rate that would be used in a separate financing transaction between
the entity and its customer.



Noncash consideration

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Noncash Consideration
32-21 To determine the transaction price for contracts in which a customer
promises consideration in a form other than cash, an entity shall measure the
estimated fair value of the noncash consideration at contract inception (that is,
the date at which the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 are met).
32-22 If an entity cannot reasonably estimate the fair value of the noncash
consideration, the entity shall measure the consideration indirectly by
reference to the standalone selling price of the goods or services promised
to the customer (or class of customer) in exchange for the consideration.
32-23 The fair value of the noncash consideration may vary after contract
inception because of the form of the consideration (for example, a change in
the price of a share to which an entity is entitled to receive from a customer).
Changes in the fair value of noncash consideration after contract inception that
are due to the form of the consideration are not included in the transaction
price. If the fair value of the noncash consideration promised by a customer
varies for reasons other than the form of the consideration (for example, the
exercise price of a share option changes because of the entity’s performance),
an entity shall apply the guidance on variable consideration in paragraphs 606-
10-32-5 through 32-14. If the fair value of the noncash consideration varies
because of the form of the consideration and for reasons other than the form
of the consideration, an entity shall apply the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-
32-5 through 32-14 on variable consideration only to the variability resulting
from reasons other than the form of the consideration.
32-24 If a customer contributes goods or services (for example, materials,
equipment, or labor) to facilitate an entity’s fulfillment of the contract, the
entity shall assess whether it obtains control of those contributed goods or
services. If so, the entity shall account for the contributed goods or services as
noncash consideration received from the customer.
> Illustrations
• > Noncash Consideration
• • > Example 31—Entitlement to Noncash Consideration
55-248 An entity enters into a contract with a customer to provide a weekly
service for one year. The contract is signed on January 1, 20X1, and work
begins immediately. The entity concludes that the service is a single
performance obligation in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-14(b). This is
because the entity is providing a series of distinct services that are
substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer (the services




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     367
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



transfer to the customer over time and use the same method to measure
progress—that is, a time-based measure of progress).
55-249 In exchange for the service, the customer promises 100 shares of its
common stock per week of service (a total of 5,200 shares for the contract).
The terms in the contract require that the shares must be paid upon the
successful completion of each week of service.
55-250 To determine the transaction price (and the amount of revenue to be
recognized), the entity measures the estimated fair value of 5,200 shares at
contract inception (that is, on January 1, 20X1). The entity measures its
progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation and
recognizes revenue as each week of service is complete. The entity does not
reflect any changes in the fair value of the 5,200 shares after contract inception
in the transaction price. However, the entity assesses any related contract
asset or receivable for impairment. Upon receipt of the noncash consideration,
the entity would apply the guidance related to the form of the noncash
consideration to determine whether and how any changes in fair value that
occurred after contract inception should be recognized.


Noncash consideration received from a customer is measured at contract
inception fair value. If an entity cannot make a reasonable estimate of the fair
value, then it refers to the estimated selling price of the promised goods or
services.
The fair value of noncash consideration can change after contract inception.
Although this may be due to the occurrence or nonoccurrence of a future event,
it can also vary due to the form of the consideration – e.g. variations due to
changes in the price per share if the noncash consideration is an equity
instrument.
When the fair value of noncash consideration varies for reasons other than the
form of the consideration – e.g. the number of equity instruments to be issued
by the customer to the entity – those changes are reflected in the transaction
price and are subject to the guidance on constraining variable consideration. In
contrast, if the variability is because of the form of the noncash consideration –
e.g. changes in the stock price – then the constraint does not apply and the
transaction price is not adjusted. The determination of whether a change in fair
value was caused by the form of the noncash consideration or other reasons,
and the determination of how to allocate fair value changes between those
affecting transaction price and those that do not, may be challenging in
some situations.
Noncash consideration received from the customer to facilitate an entity’s
fulfillment of the contract – e.g. materials or equipment – is accounted for when
the entity obtains control of those contributed goods or services.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     368
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Exchanges of nonmonetary assets
The accounting for nonmonetary transactions based on fair value under
Topic 606 is broadly consistent with legacy US GAAP on nonmonetary
transactions, except for those in which the consideration received from the
customer is a share-based payment.
One of the requirements for a contract to exist under Topic 606 is that it has
commercial substance, which would result in nonmonetary exchanges being
accounted for at fair value. Under Topic 606, if an entity cannot reasonably
estimate the fair value of the noncash consideration received, then it looks to
the estimated selling price of the promised goods or services.
However, under legacy US GAAP, rather than looking to the estimated selling
price of the promised goods or services, the entity used the fair value of either
the assets received or the assets relinquished in the exchange – unless the fair
value of the assets could not be determined within reasonable limits, or the
transaction lacked commercial substance (which, under Topic 606, a lack of
commercial substance would mean that a contract does not exist).
Goods or services in exchange for share-based payments
Legacy US GAAP provided guidance on the measurement date for equity-based
consideration received by an entity in exchange for goods or services
transferred to a customer. In addition, it provided guidance on recognition and
measurement when the equity-based consideration included terms that change
after the measurement date as a result of achieving a performance or market
condition – e.g. a change in the exercise price or term of a stock option.
Topic 606 eliminates legacy US GAAP on the accounting for share-based
payments received by an entity in exchange for goods or services. Therefore,
equity instruments received in a contract with a customer are accounted for
consistent with other noncash consideration and measured at contract
inception. When the fair value of equity-based consideration changes because
of the form of consideration (i.e. changes in the value per share of stock) after
the measurement date, the incremental portion of the change in fair value is not
considered revenue. Changes for reasons other than the form (e.g. changes in
the number of shares to be received) give rise to variable consideration, which
is included in revenue in accordance with the constraint guidance.
Use of the estimated selling price
The alternative of using the estimated selling price of the promised goods or
services if the fair value of the noncash consideration cannot be reasonably
estimated may result in differences from practice under legacy US GAAP if an
entity uses the stand-alone selling price rather than following the guidance for
other fair value measurements.
In addition, Topic 606 eliminates the specific requirements on determining
whether sufficient evidence exists – including prescriptive guidance requiring
sufficient recent cash transactions to support the selling price – when
recognizing revenue on exchanges of advertising space and exchanges




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     369
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



involving barter credit transactions. Rather, under Topic 606, an entity
recognizes revenue based on the fair value of the services received if that fair
value can be reasonably estimated in a barter transaction involving advertising
services. If not, the entity recognizes revenue based on the estimated stand-
alone selling price of the services provided.
However, the entity will need to conclude that the contract has commercial
substance – i.e. that it will change the amount, timing or uncertainty of the
contract’s future cash flows – in order to conclude that a contract exists.
Otherwise, no revenue is recognized because the requirements for a contract
under Topic 606 are not met.
Chapter A – Scope further discusses the accounting for nonmonetary
exchanges of software under Topic 606 and differences in that accounting from
legacy US GAAP.




Consideration payable to a customer

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Consideration Payable to a Customer
32-25 Consideration payable to a customer includes:
a. Cash amounts that an entity pays, or expects to pay, to the customer (or to
   other parties that purchase the entity’s goods or services from the
   customer).
b. Credit or other items (for example, a coupon or voucher) that can be
   applied against amounts owed to the entity (or to other parties that
   purchase the entity’s goods or services from the customer).
c. Equity instruments (liability or equity classified) granted in conjunction with
   selling goods or services (for example, shares, share options, or other
   equity instruments).
An entity shall account for consideration payable to a customer as a reduction
of the transaction price and, therefore, of revenue unless the payment to the
customer is in exchange for a distinct good or service (as described in
paragraphs 606-10-25-18 through 25-22) that the customer transfers to the
entity. If the consideration payable to a customer includes a variable amount,
an entity shall estimate the transaction price (including assessing whether the
estimate of variable consideration is constrained) in accordance with
paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through 32-13.
32-25A Equity instruments granted by an entity in conjunction with selling
goods or services shall be measured and classified under Topic 718 on stock
compensation. The equity instrument shall be measured at the grant date in
accordance with Topic 718 (for both equity-classified and liability-classified
share-based payment awards). Changes in the measurement of the equity
instrument (through the application of Topic 718) after the grant date that are
due to the form of the consideration shall not be included in the transaction
price. Any changes due to the form of the consideration shall be reflected



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     370
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



elsewhere in the grantor’s income statement. See paragraphs 606-10-55-88A
through 55-88B for implementation guidance on equity instruments granted as
consideration payable to a customer.
32-26 If consideration payable to a customer is a payment for a distinct good or
service from the customer, then an entity shall account for the purchase of the
good or service in the same way that it accounts for other purchases from
suppliers. If the amount of consideration payable to the customer exceeds the
fair value of the distinct good or service that the entity receives from the
customer, then the entity shall account for such an excess as a reduction of
the transaction price. If the entity cannot reasonably estimate the fair value of
the good or service received from the customer, it shall account for all of the
consideration payable to the customer as a reduction of the transaction price.
32-27 Accordingly, if consideration payable to a customer is accounted for as a
reduction of the transaction price, an entity shall recognize the reduction of
revenue when (or as) the later of either of the following events occurs:
a. The entity recognizes revenue for the transfer of the related goods or
   services to the customer.
b. The entity pays or promises to pay the consideration (even if the payment
   is conditional on a future event). That promise might be implied by the
   entity’s customary business practices.
• > Equity Instruments Granted as Consideration Payable to a Customer
55-88A Paragraph 606-10-32-25A requires that equity instruments granted in
conjunction with an entity selling goods or services be measured and classified
under Topic 718 on stock compensation. If the number of equity instruments
promised in a contract is variable due to a service condition or a performance
condition that affects the vesting of an award, an entity should estimate the
number of equity instruments that it will be obligated to issue to its customer
and update the estimate of the number of equity instruments until the award
ultimately vests in accordance with Topic 718. When measuring each
instrument, the entity should include, in accordance with Topic 718, the effect
of any market conditions and service or performance conditions that affect
factors other than vesting. Examples of factors other than vesting are included
in paragraph 718-10-30-15. Changes in the grant-date fair value of an award
due to revisions in the expected outcome of a service condition or a
performance condition (both those that affect vesting and those that affect
factors other than vesting) are not deemed to be changes due to the form of
the consideration (as described in paragraph 606-10-32-23) and, therefore,
should be reflected in the transaction price.
55-88B Paragraph 606-10-32-25A requires that equity instruments granted by
an entity in conjunction with selling goods or services be measured and
classified under Topic 718 at the grant date of the instrument. When an
estimate of the fair value of an equity instrument is required before the
grant date in accordance with the guidance on variable consideration in
paragraph 606-10-32- 7, the estimate should be based on the fair value of the
award at the reporting dates that occur before the grant date. An entity should
change the transaction price for the cumulative effect of measuring the fair
value at each reporting period after the initial estimate until the grant date
occurs. In the period in which the grant date occurs, the entity should change




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     371
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



the transaction price for the cumulative effect of measuring the fair value at the
grant date rather than the fair value previously used at any prior reporting date.
• • > Example 32—Consideration Payable to a Customer
55-252 An entity that manufactures consumer goods enters into a one-year
contract to sell goods to a customer that is a large global chain of retail stores.
The customer commits to buy at least $15 million of products during the year.
The contract also requires the entity to make a nonrefundable payment of
$1.5 million to the customer at the inception of the contract. The $1.5 million
payment will compensate the customer for the changes it needs to make to its
shelving to accommodate the entity’s products.
55-253 The entity considers the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-25 through
32-27 and concludes that the payment to the customer is not in exchange for a
distinct good or service that transfers to the entity. This is because the entity
does not obtain control of any rights to the customer’s shelves. Consequently,
the entity determines that, in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-25, the
$1.5 million payment is a reduction of the transaction price.
55-254 The entity applies the guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-27 and
concludes that the consideration payable is accounted for as a reduction in the
transaction price when the entity recognizes revenue for the transfer of the
goods. Consequently, as the entity transfers goods to the customer, the entity
reduces the transaction price for each good by 10 percent ($1.5 million ÷
$15 million). Therefore, in the first month in which the entity transfers goods to
the customer, the entity recognizes revenue of $1.8 million ($2.0 million
invoiced amount – $0.2 million of consideration payable to the customer).


Payments to a customer may relate to goods or services received from the
customer, a discount or refund for the goods or services provided to the
customer, or a combination of both. As such, the entity needs to evaluate the
substance of the payment.
Consideration payable to a customer includes cash amounts that an entity pays
or expects to pay to the customer. It also includes credits or other items (e.g. a
coupon or voucher) that can be applied by the customer against the amount
owed to the entity or to other parties that purchase the entity’s goods or
services from the customer. [606-10-32-25]
Entities will also need to evaluate payments made to other parties in the direct
chain of distribution. This is because payments to customers include cash
payments that an entity pays, or expects to pay, to the customer or to other
parties that purchase the entity’s goods or services from the customer.
However, in some cases an entity may conclude that it is appropriate to apply
the guidance more broadly to payments made to entities outside the direct
distribution chain. [606-10-32-25]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     372
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                   Question D345
                   Are payments outside the contract with the
                   customer or direct distribution chain evaluated as
                   consideration payable to a customer?
Interpretive response: It depends. Determining how broadly to evaluate
payments within and outside a distribution chain is a matter of judgment.
Payments made to a customer that are not specified in the contract may still
represent consideration payable to a customer. An entity develops a process for
evaluating whether any other payments made to a customer are consideration
payable that requires further evaluation under Topic 606. However, an entity
need not always identify and assess all amounts ever paid to a customer to
determine if they represent consideration payable to a customer. [TRG Agenda
Paper No. 28]

Payments within the direct distribution chain – i.e. payments to other parties
that purchase the entity’s goods or services from the customer – are accounted
for as consideration payable to a customer. However, the evaluation of
payments to parties outside a direct distribution chain requires judgment and a
determination as to whether those incentives represent payments on behalf of
the entity’s customer. The consideration payable to a customer guidance may
apply to these payments in some circumstances.
For example, an entity may have transactions or a business model that results
in payments to a customer’s customer who is not in the direct distribution chain
because that party does not purchase the entity’s goods or services. This is
common in arrangements in which the entity is an agent connecting its
customer to the end user of the customer’s goods or services – e.g. a platform
or marketing company that connects buyers and sellers may provide incentives
to the buyer to increase the buyer’s purchases with the seller. Depending on
the facts and circumstances, the platform or marketing company may conclude
either the buyer or the seller or both are the entity’s customers. In these types
of business models, the analysis of whether to apply the consideration payable
to a customer guidance begins with the entity’s conclusion about whether it
has more than one customer among the various parties. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 28]
However, even when an entity concludes that the party to which it makes
incentive payments is not its customer and is not within the direct distribution
chain, the entity still evaluates those payments to determine whether they
represent payments made on behalf of the entity’s customer and, if so, the
consideration payable to a customer guidance is applied. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 28]
This evaluation considers not only contractual obligations to the customer but
also any implied promises to provide incentives to the entity’s customer’s
customer. We understand that the SEC staff believes, in general, that an
implied promise for an entity to make payments (i.e. fund discounts) to buyers
(i.e. end users) that purchase from the entity’s customers exists if the entity’s
incentive promotion or program is reasonably knowable to the entity’s
customers. Based on discussions with the SEC staff, an incentive promotion or
program may be reasonably knowable to a customer when the benefit is visible
to the customer (e.g. via a platform app, website, e-mails, or other forms of
communications that are accessible by the customer) such that the customer is




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     373
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



reasonably aware that end users of the entity’s platform are receiving benefits
on purchases and therefore has a reasonable expectation that incentives will be
provided to the entity’s customer. See Example D345.1.
An entity may also make payments to a third party outside the distribution chain
on behalf of a customer. The consideration payable to a customer guidance may
also apply to these payments in some circumstances (see Question D346).



                   Example D345.1
                   Payments to customers – payments outside the
                   distribution chain
Software Company (agent) markets and incentivizes the purchase of Retailer’s
(principal) computers by providing coupons to Retailer’s Buyer (end customer).
Software Company’s software is embedded in the Retailer’s computer, and
Software Company earns revenue from Retailer when computers are
purchased by Retailer’s Buyer with the embedded software.
The following diagram depicts this arrangement.


                                  Coupons
                                                      Retailer’s Buyer
                                                      (End-customer)

     Software
  Company (Agent)                                                   Products


                                                           Retailer
                                                          (Principal)


Depending on the facts and circumstances, Software Company might conclude
that:
— both Retailer and Buyer are its customers. In that case, Software Company
  applies the consideration payable to a customer guidance to determine
  whether the coupon payment is accounted for as a reduction of revenue or
  as an expense if it is payment for a distinct good or service; or
— only Retailer is its customer. In that case, Software Company performs an
  additional evaluation to determine whether the coupon payment represents
  the fulfillment of a promise (contractual or implied) to the Retailer to provide
  coupons to its customer (i.e. a payment made to Retailer’s Buyer on behalf
  of the Retailer customer). If a contractual obligation or an implied promise
  exists, the payments are accounted for as a reduction of revenue. If no
  contractual or implied promise to the Retailer exists, then the coupon
  payment is generally recorded as sales and marketing expense.
See Question D345 for additional considerations when the entity is making a
payment to a third party that is its customer’s customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     374
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                   Question D346
                   Are payments to a third party evaluated as
                   consideration payable to a customer?

Interpretive response: Yes, in some cases. While incentives are often paid
directly to a customer or a customer’s customer, there are cases in which
payments are made to a third party outside the direct chain of distribution. For
example, an entity may agree to make a payment directly to a third-party vendor
on the customer’s behalf.
Determining if such a payment is consideration payable to a customer requires
an evaluation of the nature of the payment. We believe the direction of the cash
payment by the entity (i.e. whether directly to the customer or to a third party)
should not, on its own, drive the accounting conclusion. Instead, an entity
considers whether the payment is, in substance, an incentive to the customer
under the contract. Incentive payments could occur before or after an entity
enters into a contract with the customer.
An entity needs to develop a process for evaluating whether payments made to
third parties represent consideration payable to a customer. An entity also
needs to consider whether it obtains control of a distinct good or service from
the third party.
The payment to a third party is evaluated as consideration payable to a
customer and recognized as a reduction to revenue when:
— the entity does not obtain control of a distinct good or service provided by
  the third party; and
— the payment to the third party is for the customer’s benefit.
Conversely, if the entity obtains control over a distinct good or service from the
third party, it accounts for the payment in the same way as other purchases. If
that good or service is subsequently transferred to the customer, it represents
the satisfaction of a performance obligation under the contract.
See Question D345 for additional considerations when the entity is making a
payment to a third party that is its customer’s customer.



                   Example D346.1
                   Customer incentive paid to a third party
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide SaaS over 5 years.
The contract entitles Customer to a specified hardware component to be used
with ABC’s SaaS. The hardware is paid for by ABC as an incentive for Customer
to enter into the arrangement. ABC has a relationship with a hardware supplier
through which it can obtain substantial price discounts.
Scenario 1: ABC does not obtain control of the goods
ABC places the hardware order with the agreed-upon supplier directly.
Customer can select the style of the hardware and designate the location to
which they will be shipped. ABC does not take possession of the hardware.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     375
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



ABC subsequently makes a payment directly to the supplier to settle the
purchase.
The nature of this payment to the supplier is, in substance, an incentive for
Customer to enter into the arrangement. ABC does not receive a distinct good
or service from the supplier because at no point does ABC control the hardware
or direct its use. Therefore, the payment is accounted for as consideration
payable to a customer and a reduction of the transaction price in the contract
with Customer. Because the SaaS transfers over time (see Question F130), the
payment reduces revenue over the term of the service based on an appropriate
measure of progress.
Scenario 2: ABC obtains control of the goods
ABC makes bulk hardware purchases and separately provides them to
customers when a new contract is entered into and also sells hardware
separately. ABC takes possession of the hardware and bears the risk of loss
until it is delivered to Customer.
In this scenario, ABC receives a distinct good or service in exchange for the
payment to the supplier. While the purpose of the hardware is to incentivize
Customer to enter into a new arrangement, ABC determines that it has control
over the hardware and can direct its use for other purposes as it chooses. For
example, it could choose to resell the hardware to any customer. Therefore,
procurement of the hardware from the supplier is accounted for as a purchase
rather than consideration payable to a customer.
The hardware is determined to be distinct from the SaaS. Therefore, when the
hardware is controlled by ABC before it is transferred to Customer, it is
accounted for as performance obligations in the contract.



                   Example D346.2
                   Commission paid to a third party
ABC Corp. provides its customers with access to its proprietary online database
of resumes, which customers use to fill personnel positions. Most customers
enter into an arrangement directly with ABC for access to its online database.
However, certain customers (Customers) are referred to ABC through a
recruitment agency (Agency) that assists Customers with their larger
recruitment efforts. Agency provides Customers with a suite of services and
also suggests that Customers use ABC's platform as a tool to identify qualified
candidates.
ABC has an arrangement with Agency that obligates ABC to pay Agency a
commission when Customers sign up for access to ABC’s database. Agency
does not commit to a quantity of referrals but when Customers want to
purchase access to ABC’s database, Agency collects the full list price of ABC’s
services from Customers and remits the amount due to ABC net of their
commission.
ABC considers the following facts when determining how to present the
amounts retained by Agency:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     376
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




— The contracts between Agency and Customers typically empower Agency
      to act on behalf of Customers when they choose to use ABC’s services.
      Agency will often execute the contracts with ABC on Customers’ behalf.
— The licenses to access ABC’s database are in the Customers’ name and not
      the Agency’s name. Likewise, order forms and invoices are in the names of
      Customers (not Agency), but reference the right of the end-customers to
      have their enrolled agent execute or fulfill on their behalf.
— Agency does not control the license to access ABC’s database before it is
      provided to Customers and Customers can cancel their arrangement with
      Agency without affecting their ability to use and benefit from ABC’s
      database.
Agency is performing a service for both ABC and Customers under separate
arrangements. Agency is not a reseller of ABC’s database but rather acts in the
capacity of a sales agent for ABC. The nature of the payments made to Agency
is commissions to obtain contracts with customers. Although the amounts
collected from Customers are net of the commission payments when remitted
by Agency, the commission payments do not represent payments to a
customer and are therefore presented as costs to obtain a contract and do not
reduce revenue.


Accounting for consideration payable to a customer
The following decision tree summarizes how an entity would distinguish
between a reduction of transaction price or a payment for goods or services.

          Does the consideration
                                                             Consideration payable is accounted
       payable to a customer (or to
                                                                        for as either:
        other parties that purchase
           the entity’s goods or
                                                  No         (a) variable consideration (estimated
       services from the customer)
                                                             and included in the transaction price
        represent a payment for a
                                                             at contract inception); or
         distinct good or service?
                                                             (b) a reduction of the transaction
                                                             price and recognized at the later of
                            Yes
                                                             either of the following:
                                                             — the entity recognizes revenue
         Can the entity reasonably                                for the transfer of the related
         estimate the fair value of                               goods or services
            the good or service                   No         — the entity pays or promises to
                 received?                                        pay the consideration (which
                                                                  might also be implied)
                            Yes

          Does the consideration
          payable exceed the fair                            Consideration payable is accounted
        value of the distinct good or             No          for as a purchase from suppliers
                  service?

                            Yes

  — Excess of consideration
    payable is accounted for in
    same manner as if the
    consideration payable was not a
    payment for a distinct good or
    service

  — Remainder is accounted for as
    a purchase from suppliers




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     377
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




Payments for a distinct good or service
When a payment to a customer is for a distinct good or service, an entity
accounts for the payment in the same way as for other purchases from
suppliers. An entity evaluates whether a good or service received from the
customer is distinct using the same criteria in Step 2 to identify performance
obligations. See Chapter C: Step 2 for further discussion of the distinct criteria.
[606-10-32-26]

If the entity does not receive a distinct good or service in exchange for the
payment, the payment is considered a reduction of the transaction price.


Fair value of the payment
The amount of consideration received from a customer for goods or services
and the amount of consideration paid to that customer for goods or services
could be linked even if they are separate events. For example, a customer may
pay more for goods or services from an entity than it otherwise would have paid
if it were receiving a payment from the entity. [606-10-32-26]
As such, any amount paid to a customer for goods or services is limited to their
fair value. The amounts in excess of fair value are recorded as a reduction of the
transaction price. [606-10-32-26]
If the entity cannot reasonably estimate the fair value of the good or service
received from the customer, it accounts for all of the consideration payable to
the customer as a reduction of the transaction price. [606-10-32-26]


Payment accounted for as a reduction of the
transaction price
Consideration payable to a customer that is a reduction of the transaction price
is either accounted for as variable consideration and included in the transaction
price at contract inception or subject to the ‘later of’ guidance. [606-10-32-25, 32-27]
If the consideration payable to a customer includes a variable amount, it
estimates the amount at contract inception and includes that amount in the
transaction price. The transaction price is recognized as revenue when (or as)
control of the goods or services is transferred. [606-10-32-25]
However, if the amounts are subject to the ‘later of’ guidance, the payments
are recognized as a reduction of revenue as the later of the date when the
related revenue is recognized or the entity promises to pay such considerations
(which can be implied). [606-10-32-27]
As a result, because the accounting could be different, the entity will need to
distinguish between when the payments are accounted for as variable
consideration or under the ‘later of’ guidance




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     378
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, cash payments made from an entity to a customer
were presumed to be a reduction of revenue. This presumption could be
overcome if the entity received an identifiable benefit in exchange for the cash
payment and the fair value of the benefit could be reasonably estimated.
[605-50-45-2]

Topic 606 requires an entity to evaluate whether it receives distinct goods or
services in exchange for its payment to a customer, instead of whether the
entity has received an identifiable benefit. Although these concepts appear to
be similar, Topic 606 does not contain the rebuttable presumption that the
payment is a reduction of revenue.



                   Question D347
                   Does an entity include variable consideration in the
                   transaction price or follow the ‘later of’ guidance on
                   consideration payable to a customer?
Interpretive response: It depends. Amounts payable to a customer could be
both variable consideration and consideration payable to a customer. However,
the accounting for variable consideration and consideration payable to a
customer could be different.
— Variable consideration. The entity estimates the variable consideration at
  contract inception and this estimate affects the transaction price. The
  transaction price is recognized as revenue as control of the goods or
  services is transferred.
— Consideration payable to a customer (‘later of’ guidance). Amounts are
  recognized as a reduction of revenue at the later of when the related
  revenue is recognized or the entity promises to pay such considerations
  (which can be implied).
To determine whether to account for the payment as variable consideration or
follow the ‘later of’ guidance, an entity evaluates its past practice and other
activities that could give rise to an expectation at contract inception that the
transaction price includes a variable amount. For example, in the case of a
customer incentive, at contract inception an entity evaluates whether it intends
to provide an incentive or if the customer has a reasonable expectation that an
incentive will be provided even though it may be in the form of consideration
payable to a customer. If yes, then the incentive constitutes variable
consideration. The incentive reduces the transaction price and revenue will be
affected when the entity transfers control of the good or service.
The ‘later of’ guidance applies only if the entity concludes at contract inception
that the contract does not have variable consideration in the form of an
incentive to the customer or if the contract at inception includes a fixed
payment to a customer. An example of a fixed payment is a nonrefundable
upfront payment to a customer (see Question D370).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     379
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                  Example D347.1
                  Payments to customers – Variable consideration
Software Company C contracts with Retailer X and delivers shrink-wrapped
software on December 15, Year 1. On January 20, Year 2, Software Company C
offers coupons in a newspaper to encourage retail sales of the software sold to
Retailer X. Software Company C agrees to reimburse Retailer X for coupons
redeemed. Software Company C offered similar coupons in prior years.
Software Company C would likely determine that the transaction price for the
goods sold on December 15, Year 1 included variable consideration, given its
history of offering coupons.
Conversely, if Software Company C had not offered coupons in prior years and
did not expect to offer any coupons at contract inception, then it would
recognize the amount payable to the retailer as an adjustment to revenue when
it communicated to Retailer X its intention to reimburse Retailer X for any
redeemed coupons.



                   Question D350
                   Are payments to customers in the form of equity-
                   based instruments, instead of cash, considered
                   ‘consideration payable to a customer’?
Interpretive response: Yes. Topic 606 states that consideration payable to a
customer includes equity-based instruments (liability- or equity-classified)
granted to customers in conjunction with selling goods or services. Therefore,
these instruments are recognized as a reduction of revenue unless they
represent a fair value payment for a distinct good or service under Topic 606.
When the equity-based instruments are accounted for as a reduction of
revenue, the grant date fair value is recognized as a reduction of revenue in the
same manner as if the entity made a cash payment to the customer. However,
Topic 606 states that the equity-based instruments are measured and classified
under Topic 718 (share-based payments). Therefore, it is important to consider
the applicable guidance in both Topic 718 and Topic 606 for these transactions.
The following are some of the key aspects to consider when evaluating an
equity-based instrument issued to a customer accounted for as a reduction of
revenue.
Grant date fair value
The grant-date fair value of an equity-based instrument (as determined under
Topic 718) is ultimately recorded as a reduction of revenue. However, if an
entity promises or intends to provide an equity-based instrument to a customer
and the grant date has not occurred, the entity follows the transaction price
guidance in Topic 606 and estimates the fair value of the equity-based
instrument. The estimate of fair value is adjusted each reporting date until the
grant date(s) is achieved. See section 4 of KPMG Handbook, Share-based
payment, for further discussion on determining the grant date.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     380
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Fully vested shares
If the equity-based instruments are fully vested (e.g. not subject to future
customer purchases), the entity evaluates the payment in the same way it
would a cash incentive payment to determine when and how to record it. This
evaluation may be similar to the accounting for nonrefundable upfront cash
payments to a customer as discussed in Question D370 and require the entity
to assess whether to recognize an asset. Therefore, depending on the facts and
circumstances, even though the equity-based instruments are immediately
vested they may not be immediately recognized as a reduction of revenue but
instead recorded as an asset and recognized as a reduction of revenue as future
revenue is recognized. See chapter 5 of KPMG Handbook, Revenue recognition,
for further discussion on upfront payments to customers.
Vesting conditions
An entity may grant equity-based instruments to the customer with vesting
conditions. When the vesting is based on a service condition or performance
condition, the amount that ultimately is recorded as a reduction of revenue
depends on the number of shares that actually vest according to those
conditions. Each reporting date, the transaction price is reduced by the grant-
date fair value of the number of equity-based instruments expected to vest
(subject to the entity’s forfeiture policy discussed below) in accordance with
Topic 718. The amounts are adjusted each period until the equity-based
instrument ultimately vests.
When vesting is based on a market condition (e.g. the entity achieving a target
share price), the existence of that condition affects the grant-date fair value of
the award and not whether it is recorded. Therefore, the existence of a market
condition does not change the number of equity-based instruments that are
recorded as a reduction of revenue but rather the grant-date fair value of those
equity-based instruments.
Judgment is required to evaluate and distinguish between different types of
vesting conditions. See section 4 of KPMG Handbook, Share-based payment,
for further discussion on vesting conditions. The following are additional
considerations related to service and performance conditions.
Service condition
A service condition includes nonemployees rendering services to the grantor.
We believe it also includes vesting based on a customer purchasing a volume of
goods or services.
Determining the number of equity-based instruments with a service condition
that are expected to vest depends on the entity’s policy election for estimating
forfeitures.
— If an entity’s policy is to estimate expected forfeitures, it reduces the
  transaction price by the number of equity-based instruments that are
  expected to vest and adjusts that estimate each reporting date.
— If an entity’s policy is to record forfeitures only when they occur, it reduces
  the transaction price for the full number of equity-based instruments that
  could vest regardless of probability and would only increase the transaction
  price if the equity-based instruments are forfeited.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     381
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



An entity’s forfeiture policy is an entity-wide accounting policy election that
applies to all nonemployee equity-based instrument transactions, including
arrangements with customers. Entities should carefully evaluate their policy
decision because the timing and amount of revenue recognized may
significantly differ, may not align with the economics of the transaction and may
differ from a cash incentive. See section 4 of KPMG Handbook, Share-based
payment, for a discussion of the entity’s forfeiture policy for nonemployee
awards.
Performance condition
A performance condition includes achieving a target solely based on the
grantor’s own operations (or activities) or the grantee’s performance related to
the grantor’s own operations (or activities). Examples of a performance
condition include equity-based instruments that vest upon a grantor’s liquidity
event (e.g. change of control or IPO) or the grantor achieving a specified
milestone (e.g. FDA approval) or level of profitability.
Equity-based instruments granted to a customer with a performance condition
are only estimated and included as a reduction in the transaction price when the
performance condition is probable of being achieved. While assessing the
probability of service or performance condition vesting is similar to estimating
variable consideration under Topic 606 (subject to the constraint), the variability
in revenue associated with vesting conditions is measured under Topic 718.
Classification
An equity-based instrument issued to customers is equity-classified or liability-
classified in accordance with Topic 718. An equity-classified award is measured
at grant-date fair value and is not remeasured. A liability-classified award is
measured at grant-date fair value and then remeasured each period. Nonpublic
entities can make a policy election to measure all liability-classified instruments
in Topic 718 either at fair value or at intrinsic value. See section 3 of KPMG
Handbook, Share-based payment, for a discussion on determining classification.
For both equity-classified and liability-classified instruments granted to
customers, the grant-date fair value is ultimately what is recorded as a
reduction of revenue. The subsequent remeasurement of the liability is
recorded elsewhere in the entity’s income statement.
Modifications
If an entity modifies the equity-based instrument granted to a customer and
that modification changes the fair value, vesting conditions or classification of
the equity-based instrument, it evaluates the modification under Topic 718,
which could impact the value that is recorded as a reduction of revenue.
Additionally, the entity needs to evaluate the impact of the modification under
Topic 606 to determine how any changes resulting from the modification are
recorded as a reduction of revenue.
Assessing modifications can be complex under both Topic 718 and Topic 606.
See section 5 of KPMG Handbook, Share-based payment, for a discussion of
modifications under Topic 718. See chapter 11 and chapter 5 of KPMG
Handbook, Revenue recognition, for guidance on modifications under Topic 606
and illustrative example of payments to customers in the form of equity-based
instruments, respectively.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     382
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price




                   Question D360
                   How should an entity present consideration
                   payable to a customer that results in ‘negative
                   revenue’?
Interpretive response: Unless a payment to a customer is in exchange for a
distinct good or service, an entity accounts for the payment as a reduction of
the transaction price and, therefore, of revenue. In some situations, the amount
of consideration payable to a customer could exceed the cumulative amount of
consideration the entity expects or has received from a customer resulting in
‘negative revenue’. Topic 606 does not explicitly address whether it is
appropriate to reclassify negative revenue to expense. [606-10-32-25]
We believe an entity will typically record consideration payable to a customer as
a reduction of revenue even when it results in negative revenue. However,
there may be limited circumstances in which reclassifying negative revenue to
an expense is also acceptable. The following are examples in which recognizing
an expense would be acceptable.
— An entity makes an upfront payment to a potential new customer in relation
  to a new product. However, the entity cannot conclude that the payment
  represents an asset related to expected purchases because there is no
  committed contract and a high degree of uncertainty of obtaining future
  contracts.
— A customer relationship is terminated such that it is unlikely that there will
  be future anticipated contracts, and the payment exceeds cumulative
  revenue recognized during the customer relationship, possibly because of
  threatened litigation.
There may be other limited circumstances in which there is negative revenue in
a period, and determining whether it is appropriate to reclassify the payments
to expense will require significant judgment based on an evaluation of the facts
and circumstances.



                   Question D370
                   How should an entity account for a nonrefundable
                   upfront payment to a customer or potential
                   customer?
Interpretive response: It depends. Entities may make nonrefundable upfront
payments to customers or potential customers to motivate that (potential)
customer to enter into a contract. Often these are characterized as ‘pay to play’
or ‘exclusivity’ payments, but they can also be made to reimburse the customer
for costs associated with entering into the contract – new vendor costs,
termination fees on previous contract, etc.
When the upfront payments are not in exchange for a distinct good or service,
entities account for the cost as a reduction of the transaction price. However,
many times entities may make these payments even if there is no enforceable
contract with the customer or the contract term is very short (e.g. a month-to-



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     383
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



month contract). In those scenarios, recognizing an upfront payment
immediately as a reduction of revenue or as an expense could result in an
upfront loss.
The TRG discussed two potential approaches to accounting for nonrefundable
upfront payments to customers. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 59]

                                            Payments to customers are capitalized and amortized as
  View A: Expected
                                            a reduction of revenue over expected purchases,
  purchases
                                            including purchases under potential future contracts.
                                            Payments to customers are recognized as a reduction of
                                            revenue over the existing contract. If no contract exists,
  View B: Contract period
                                            the payment is immediately recognized in the income
                                            statement.


The TRG agreed that View A is appropriate when the payment meets the
definition of an asset and is recoverable from future cash flows (including cash
flows from anticipated renewals or contracts). View B would only be
appropriate when the payment only relates to the existing contract. [TRG Agenda
Paper No. 59]

In addition, Ruth Uejio, Professional Accounting Fellow, Office of Chief
Accountant, discussed this topic in a speech given during the 2016 AICPA
National Conference on Current SEC and PCAOB Developments.
      “From my perspective, a company must first determine what the payment
      was made for. The following are some of the questions that OCA staff may
      focus on to understand the nature and substance of the payment:
      1. What are the underlying economic reasons for the transaction? Why is
         the payment being made?
      2. How did the company communicate and describe the nature of the
         payment to its investors?
      3. What do the relevant contracts governing the payment stipulate? Does
         the payment secure an exclusive relationship between the parties?
         Does the payment result in the customer committing to make a
         minimum level of purchases from the vendor?
      4. What is the accounting basis for recognizing an asset, or recognizing an
         upfront payment immediately through earnings?
      Once a company has determined the substance of the payment, I believe a
      company should account for the payment using an accounting model that is
      consistent with the identified substance of the payment and relevant
      accounting literature. Additionally, companies should establish accounting
      policies that are consistently applied. I’d highlight that there should be a
      neutral starting point in the accounting evaluation for these types of
      arrangements. I believe that registrants must carefully evaluate all of the
      facts and circumstances in arriving at sound judgments, and should perform
      the analysis impartially. Additionally, in my view ‘matching’ is not a
      determinative factor to support asset recognition.” [2016 AICPA Conf]
Concepts Statement 6 defines assets as “probable future economic benefits
obtained or controlled by a particular entity as a result of past transactions or
events.” As such, based on the SEC speech, the TRG discussion, the definition




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     384
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



of an asset and framework in Subtopic 340-40, we believe the following are
factors (not exhaustive) that may indicate that View A is appropriate.
1. The payment is recoverable through the initial contract and/or future
   anticipated renewals. To meet the definition of an asset, the entity must
   be able to recover the asset through future cash flows. Further, the entity
   needs to obtain or control those particular benefits. By entering into the
   initial contract, the entity obtained the control of an asset. However, in
   some instances the entity may only expect to recover the payment through
   future anticipated contracts. If the payment relates to initial and future
   anticipated contracts, the asset could be recoverable through cash flows
   related to both. While payments to customers are not in the scope of
   Subtopic 340-40, this concept is similar to the notion underlying costs to
   obtain contracts with customers. As such, we believe entities could look to
   both the initial and future anticipated renewals to assess the recoverability
   of the asset.
2. The entity secures an exclusivity agreement and it is probable that the
   customer will make purchases sufficient to recover the payment. If the
   payment secures an exclusive relationship between the entity and its
   customer and it is probable the customer will order a sufficient number of
   goods or services to recover the payment, the payment would meet the
   definition of an asset as the entity has obtained a right that it controls and
   would benefit from that relationship.
3. History of renewals/average customer life. If the entity has a history or
   renewals with similarly situated customers, an average customer life longer
   than the initial contract term might indicate the payment relates to future
   expected renewals. Unless, as noted in (1) below, the payment relates only
   to the current contract.
4. Underlying reason for the payment. An entity should also consider its
   customary business practices and reason for making the payment. If the
   payment is a one-time expenditure at the beginning of a new contract (new
   customer, new product line, etc.) to secure a relationship, that payment
   may meet the definition of an asset because the payment obtained the
   contract with the customer.
In contrast, we believe the following may indicate that View B is appropriate:
1. The payments are recurring and commensurate with the subsequent
   payments upon renewal. If the entity makes payments at the beginning of
   each contract and subsequent renewal, it would indicate that the payment
   relates only to the current contract.
2. The entity does not obtain any contractual assurance (e.g. exclusivity
   or a customer contract) that future contracts will be obtained. If the
   entity does not obtain any contract (even if short-term) or exclusivity
   agreement, the entity may not have an asset that it controls.
3. The entity is entering into a new market or selling new products or
   services. If the entity does not have a history to suggest that it will be
   successful in recovering the payment through the current or future
   anticipated contracts, it may be inappropriate to defer and amortize the
   payment longer than the current contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     385
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



See Questions D390 and D400 for a discussion of the amortization period and
impairment model for these assets.



                   Example D370.1
                   Nonrefundable upfront payment to a customer –
                   SaaS
SaaS Corp. agrees to make a $1 million nonrefundable upfront payment to
Customer to help offset transition costs for a SaaS contract. The contract term
is five years but is cancellable each month without penalty. Therefore, the
contract term is only one month under Topic 606 (see Question B130). SaaS
Corp. expects the customer to purchase services for the full five years with
estimated fees of $6 million based on its experience with similar customers and
its customary business practice of making similar payments. SaaS Corp.
expects to earn margins of at least 25%.
To determine the appropriate accounting, SaaS Corp. performs the following
evaluation.
— The payment is recoverable through the cash flows from the initial
  contract and anticipated future renewals. The payment is expected to be
  recoverable from future net cash flows totaling $1.5 million ($6 million ×
  25% profit margin).
— History of renewals/average customer life. SaaS Corp. expects a
  customer life beyond the initial five-year term based on its history with
  similar customers and making similar payments.
— Underlying reason for the payment. The purpose of the payment is to
  incentivize Customer to enter into the contract and use SaaS Corp. for a
  number of years. SaaS Corp. has a customary business practice of making
  these payments at the beginning of a new customer relationship and does
  not generally make additional payments when the customer renews the
  contract.
Based on its overall evaluation of these factors, SaaS Corp. concludes that the
payment should be capitalized and amortized as a reduction of revenue over the
anticipated future purchases (see Question D390).



                   Example D370.2
                   Nonrefundable upfront payment to a customer –
                   New product
ABC Corp. has recently launched a new product in a developing field with a high
risk of technological obsolescence. In order to incentivize Reseller to buy and
sell this product to its end customers, ABC makes a $1 million nonrefundable
upfront payment to enter into an MSA that sets the pricing of future product
purchases. Reseller does not agree to exclusively sell ABC’s products or
commit to a minimum quantity.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     386
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



Reseller requires this payment to cover the cost of attempting to sell the
product to its end customers if it is not successful in the market. Given that this
is a new product, ABC does not have historical experience with this product or
similar customers.
ABC considers the following to evaluate the accounting for the payment to
Reseller.
— The entity secures an exclusivity agreement and it is probable that the
  customer will make purchases in order to recover the payment. ABC
  did not obtain a contract for a minimum purchase or exclusivity agreement
  from Reseller. While the MSA is a legal contract, Reseller did not commit to
  a minimum quantity.
— History of renewals/average customer life. The payment could be
  viewed as obtaining a customer relationship; however, the lack of historical
  experience and risk of obsolescence indicate that the payment may not be
  recoverable through future purchases.
— Underlying economic reason for the payment. ABC made the payment
  to Reseller in order to get its product into the market. However, due to the
  uncertainty and experience related to the product, it is uncertain whether
  the payment will be recoverable.
Based on its overall evaluation of the factors, ABC concludes that this payment
does not represent an asset. Therefore, it accounts for the payment as a
reduction of revenue (or expense) when the payment is made.



                   Question D380
                   Are upfront payments to customers that are
                   capitalized classified as a contract asset?
Interpretive response: Generally, no. When an entity makes an upfront
payment to a customer and does not receive distinct goods or services in
exchange for the payment, the payment generally reduces the transaction price
and is recognized either over the current contract term or estimated future
purchases (see Question D370). If the payment is deferred and recognized over
a future period, the entity records an asset.
This asset typically does not meet the definition of a contract asset. Contract
assets are rights to consideration in exchange for goods or services that the
entity has transferred to a customer when that right is conditional on something
other than the passage of time. When an entity makes an upfront payment to a
customer, it has not yet transferred goods or services, which is why the asset
created by the upfront payment does not meet the definition of a contract
asset. As a consequence, the asset would not be presented with contract
assets and would be presented separately in other assets or another
appropriate financial statement line item.
However, we believe it is also acceptable to present an asset created by a
payment to a customer that reduces the transaction price as a contract asset (or
net contract liability) when the asset relates only to the current contract – i.e.
the amortization period does not include future contracts. This is because a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     387
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



contract asset or contract liability reflects the relationship between the entity’s
performance and the customer’s payments for a current contract. In other
words, when the payment reduces the transaction price, it could be viewed
similar to consideration received from the customer and therefore included in
the net position of the contract.
It would not be appropriate to reflect an asset that relates to multiple contracts
as a contract asset because the unit of account for a contract asset and contract
liability is a single contract with a customer.
For a discussion of the amortization and impairment of assets resulting from
payments to customers, see Questions D390 and D400.



                   Question D390
                   What is the amortization period for a nonrefundable
                   upfront payment capitalized as an asset?
Interpretive response: The TRG agreed that the assessment of the
amortization period should be based on an evaluation of expected cash flows
from a customer and an entity could make this determination in the same way it
does for other assets. For example, the guidance for determining the useful life
of intangible assets in Subtopic 350-30 or determining the useful life of a cost to
obtain a contract with a customer in Subtopic 340-40 could be useful as a
framework for determining the amortization period. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 59]
We believe multiple approaches may be acceptable as long as they consider the
period of expected cash flows from the customer contracts to which the
payment relates. However, we believe the most relevant analogy is the
guidance in Subtopic 340-40, because the payments to a customer are typically
akin to a cost of obtaining a contract. As a result, the amortization period could
include both the current and anticipated contract renewals. See Chapter H –
Contract costs for further details on determining the amortization period in
Subtopic 340-40.



                   Question D400
                   How should an entity test a nonrefundable upfront
                   payment that has been deferred for impairment?
Interpretive response: The TRG agreed that in the absence of explicit
guidance, applying the principles behind other impairment tests in US GAAP
would be a supportable approach to testing a capitalized upfront fee for
impairment. In general, we believe multiple approaches may be acceptable as
long as they only take into account the recoverability of the asset from
contracts with the customer to which the payment relates. [TRG Agenda Paper No.
59]

We believe the most relevant analogy would be for an entity to use the
impairment model in Subtopic 340-40 related to costs capitalized for obtaining
contracts with customers. That impairment model takes into account cash
flows from both current and future anticipated contracts to which the asset



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                              Revenue for software and SaaS                     388
                                                                   D. Step 3: Determine the transaction price



relates. Under that guidance, an impairment loss is recognized for the
difference between the carrying amount of the asset and:
— consideration (in exchange for the goods or services to which the asset
  relates) expected to be received in the future or received but not yet
  recognized as revenue, less
— the costs that relate directly to providing those goods or services and that
  have not been recognized as expenses. [340-40-35-3]
However, the TRG did not include the contract asset impairment model as a
potential alternative. Paragraph 606-10-45-3 states that an impairment of a
contract asset should be measured, presented and disclosed in accordance
with Topic 310 (or Subtopic 326-20 on adoption). We do not believe Topic 310
(or Subtopic 326-20) would be an appropriate model for this asset because
there is no credit risk involved with the payment to a customer.
For guidance on and interpretation of Subtopic 326-20, see KPMG Handbook,
Credit impairment. See Chapter H – Contract costs for further details on the
impairment testing in Subtopic 340-40.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                               Revenue for software and SaaS                                         389
       E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




E.   Step 4: Allocate the
     transaction price to the
     performance obligations
     in the contract
     Questions and Examples
     Overview
     Determine stand-alone selling prices
     Q&A E10                   Must an entity establish a stand-alone selling price for each
                               performance obligation?
     Q&A E20                   How often does an entity need to establish a stand-alone
                               selling price for a particular performance obligation?
     Q&A E30                   Could a single good or service have more than one stand-alone
                               selling price?
     Q&A E40                   Is the stand-alone selling price required to be a point estimate
                               or can it be a range of prices?
     Q&A E50                   Can the stated contractual price be the stand-alone selling
                               price?
                               Example E50.1: Allocating the transaction price based on
                               stated contract prices
     Q&A E60                   When the stand-alone selling price is a range, what point in the
                               range should the entity use as the stand-alone selling price
                               when the stated price in the contract is outside that range?
                               Example E60.1: Contract prices are not at stand-alone selling
                               price
     Q&A E70                   Is an entity required to use an observable stand-alone selling
                               price as the stand-alone selling price for a distinct good or
                               service if one exists?
     Q&A E80                   Does an entity have a ‘free choice’ in selecting a method for
                               estimating the stand-alone selling price for a good or service
                               when the entity has determined the good or service does not
                               have an observable stand-alone selling price?
     Q&A E90                   When can a software entity use the residual approach?
                               Example E90.1: Estimating stand-alone selling price – residual
                               approach
     Q&A E100                  Can the residual approach result in zero or very little
                               consideration allocated to a good or service?




     © 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
     member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         390
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Q&A E110                  How should an entity evaluate whether the selling price of a
                          software license that is always bundled with PCS is highly
                          variable?
Q&A E120                  How should an entity evaluate whether it has established a
                          price when it has not yet sold a good or service separately – i.e.
                          whether the selling price is uncertain?
Q&A E130                  Can the stand-alone selling price of PCS be expressed as a
                          percentage of the license fee?
                          Example E130.1: Contractually stated renewal rates of PCS
                          expressed as a percentage of a license fee
                          Example E130.2: Contractually stated renewal rates of PCS
                          expressed as a percentage of a license fee bundled with
                          professional services
                          Example E130.3: Contractually stated renewal rates of PCS
                          expressed as a percentage of a license fee – renewal rates do
                          not represent stand-alone selling price
Q&A E135                  Can the stand-alone selling prices of a software license and
                          PCS both be expressed as percentages of the transaction
                          price?
Q&A E140                  How can an entity estimate the stand-alone selling prices of
                          software term licenses and PCS sold together as a bundle?
                          Example E140.1: Estimating stand-alone selling price in a term
                          license with PCS
Q&A E145                  What effect does software being ‘open-source’ have on
                          allocating transaction price between a software license and co-
                          terminus PCS?
Q&A E150                  Would it be acceptable to use an entity-published price list as
                          evidence to estimate a stand-alone selling price?
Q&A E160                  What costs should an entity consider when estimating a stand-
                          alone selling price using the expected cost plus a margin
                          approach?
Q&A E170                  How does an entity determine what margin to use when
                          developing a cost plus margin data point to estimate a stand-
                          alone selling price?
Q&A E180                  How should an entity determine the stand-alone selling price
                          for implied updates, upgrades and enhancements during an
                          installation period?
Q&A E190                  How should a software entity determine the stand-alone selling
                          price for PCS when software is deployed over time and the
                          contract contains a stated renewal rate for post-deployment
                          period PCS?
                          Example E190.1: Deployment period PCS
Q&A E200                  How should a software entity determine the stand-alone selling
                          price of PCS provided during a period of unlimited deployment



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         391
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



                          when the contract includes stated renewals of PCS during the
                          deployment period and different prices in the post-deployment
                          period?
Allocate the transaction price
Q&A E210                  Can the sum of the stand-alone selling prices in a contract be
                          less than the total transaction price?
Q&A E220                  How are nonrefundable upfront fees treated when allocating
                          the contract’s estimated transaction price to the separate
                          performance obligations?
Allocating a discount
Q&A E230                  Is an entity required to evaluate whether a discount should be
                          entirely allocated to one or more, but not all, performance
                          obligations in all contracts?
                          Example E230.1: Allocating a discount
Q&A E240                  Can an entity allocate a discount entirely to one or more
                          performance obligations when the stand-alone selling price of
                          one or more of the performance obligations is highly variable or
                          uncertain?
Q&A E250                  Is the guidance on allocating variable consideration optional?
Q&A E260                  Which is applied first – the variable consideration allocation
                          guidance or the guidance on allocating discounts?
Q&A E265                  What factors identify whether a variable payment relates
                          specifically to the entity’s efforts to transfer a distinct good or
                          service?
Q&A E270                  In order to allocate variable consideration entirely to a distinct
                          good or service within a single performance obligation, must
                          the allocation result in the same amount (absolute value) being
                          allocated to each distinct good or service within the series?
Q&A E280                  When an entity charges a consistent per transaction or per
                          usage fee in a SaaS contract with a single performance
                          obligation can the variable fees be allocated entirely to the
                          period in which they are earned?
                          Example E280.1: Transaction-based fees allocated to the
                          period they were earned
Q&A E290                  How do volume-based discounts and rebates affect the
                          allocation of variable consideration in SaaS arrangements?
                          Example E290.1: Tiered pricing
Q&A E295                  How do guaranteed minimums affect the allocation of usage-
                          based fees within a series?
                          Example E295.1: Allocating variable consideration with a
                          guaranteed minimum




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         392
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Q&A E300                  Do other changes in the price charged per transaction or usage
                          over the contract term preclude an entity from allocating a
                          variable amount to the period in which it is earned?
                          Example E300.1: Changing prices – allocation objective is met
                          Example E300.2: Changing prices – allocation objective is not
                          met
                          Example E300.3: Per user pricing – allocation objective is met
                          Example E300.4: Per user pricing – allocation objective is not
                          met
Q&A E310                  Can the allocation objective be met if zero consideration is
                          allocated to a performance obligation?
                          Example E310.1: Upfront professional services and SaaS
                          Example E310.2: Upfront professional services and SaaS –
                          tiered pricing
Q&A E320                  Can variable consideration be allocated entirely to one
                          performance obligation and fixed consideration be allocated
                          entirely to another performance obligation?
                          Example E320.1: Variable consideration allocated entirely to
                          one performance obligation in the contract
                          Example E320.2: Fixed consideration allocated to multiple
                          performance obligations and variable consideration allocated
                          entirely to one performance obligation
Q&A E330                  If a contract contains different types of variable consideration,
                          does all of the variable consideration need to be allocated in the
                          same manner?
                          Example E330.1: Multiple variable payments in one contract
                          allocated to the period they were earned
Q&A E335                  How does an entity evaluate the variable consideration
                          allocation guidance for a series of distinct quantities?
                          Example E335.1: Variable consideration allocated in a series of
                          distinct quantities
Q&A E340                  Can a significant financing component be allocated entirely to
                          one or more, but not all, performance obligations?
Q&A E345                  Can fixed consideration be allocated to one or more, but not all,
                          distinct goods or services within a series?
Q&A E346                  If a nonrefundable upfront fee relates to a separate
                          performance obligation, should it be allocated entirely to that
                          performance obligation?
Changes in the transaction price
Q&A E348                  When is a change in transaction price accounted for as a
                          contract modification?




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         393
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




Material rights
Q&A E349                  Should an entity revise the stand-alone selling price of a
                          material right if the entity’s estimate of the likelihood of
                          exercise changes?
Q&A E350                  In order to apply the alternative approach, does the outcome
                          have to be the same as estimating the stand-alone selling price
                          for each option?
Q&A E355                  Is the alternative approach limited to renewals of services?
Q&A E360                  When an option to renew a good or service provides a material
                          right, can an entity apply the alternative approach to allocating
                          the transaction price when there are other goods or services in
                          the initial contract?
Q&A E370                  If an entity applies the alternative approach of allocating the
                          transaction price to a material right, how should the entity
                          determine the amount of goods or services expected to be
                          provided?
                          Example E370.1: Estimating stand-alone selling price – material
                          rights
Q&A E380                  When an upfront fee gives rise to a material right, but the
                          renewal price is not specified in the initial contract, can the
                          alternative approach be applied?
                          Example E380.1: Nonrefundable upfront fees – alternative
                          approach
Q&A E390                  How should an entity determine the expected goods or
                          services under the alternative approach when an upfront fee
                          gives rise to a material right?
                          Example E390.1: Estimating stand-alone selling price in a
                          contract with an upfront fee that gives rise to a material right –
                          comprehensive example




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         394
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




        Step 1                     Step 2                     Step 3                    Step 4                     Step 5


                                 Identify                  Determine                 Allocate the
     Identify the                                                                                                Recognize
                               performance                 transaction               transaction
       contract                                                                                                   revenue
                                obligations                   price                      price




This chapter is organized into distinct sections as follows:
         Overview
         Determine stand-alone selling prices
         Allocate the transaction price
         Allocating a discount
         Allocating variable consideration
         Changes in the transaction price
         Material rights



Overview

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Allocating the Transaction Price to Performance Obligations
32-28 The objective when allocating the transaction price is for an entity to
allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation (or distinct good
or service) in an amount that depicts the amount of consideration to which the
entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods
or services to the customer.
32-29 To meet the allocation objective, an entity shall allocate the transaction
price to each performance obligation identified in the contract on a relative
standalone selling price basis in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-32-31
through 32-35, except as specified in paragraphs 606-10-32-36 through 32-38
(for allocating discounts) and paragraphs 606-10-32-39 through 32-41 (for
allocating consideration that includes variable amounts).
32-30 Paragraphs 606-10-32-31 through 32-41 do not apply if a contract has
only one performance obligation. However, paragraphs 606-10-32-39 through
32-41 may apply if an entity promises to transfer a series of distinct goods or
services identified as a single performance obligation in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-14(b) and the promised consideration includes variable
amounts.


Step 4 of the revenue model requires an entity to allocate the transaction price
to each performance obligation to depict the amount of consideration to which
an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods
or services to the customer (the ‘allocation objective’).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         395
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



An entity generally allocates the transaction price to each performance
obligation in proportion to its stand-alone selling price. However, when specified
criteria are met, a discount or variable consideration is allocated to one or more,
but not all, performance obligations.
This step of the revenue model comprises two sub-steps that an entity
performs at contract inception:



     Determine stand-alone selling prices                                    Allocate the transaction price




Determine stand-alone selling prices

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Allocation Based on Standalone Selling Prices
32-32 The standalone selling price is the price at which an entity would sell a
promised good or service separately to a customer. The best evidence of a
standalone selling price is the observable price of a good or service when the
entity sells that good or service separately in similar circumstances and to
similar customers. A contractually stated price or a list price for a good or
service may be (but shall not be presumed to be) the standalone selling price
of that good or service.
32-33 If a standalone selling price is not directly observable, an entity shall
estimate the standalone selling price at an amount that would result in the
allocation of the transaction price meeting the allocation objective in
paragraph 606-10-32-28. When estimating a standalone selling price, an entity
shall consider all information (including market conditions, entity-specific
factors, and information about the customer or class of customer) that is
reasonably available to the entity. In doing so, an entity shall maximize the
use of observable inputs and apply estimation methods consistently in similar
circumstances.
32-34 Suitable methods for estimating the standalone selling price of a good or
service include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Adjusted market assessment approach—An entity could evaluate the
   market in which it sells goods or services and estimate the price that a
   customer in that market would be willing to pay for those goods or
   services. That approach also might include referring to prices from the
   entity’s competitors for similar goods or services and adjusting those
   prices as necessary to reflect the entity’s costs and margins.
b. Expected cost plus a margin approach—An entity could forecast its
   expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then add an
   appropriate margin for that good or service.
c. Residual approach—An entity may estimate the standalone selling price by
   reference to the total transaction price less the sum of the observable




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         396
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



       standalone selling prices of other goods or services promised in the
       contract. However, an entity may use a residual approach to estimate, in
       accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-33, the standalone selling price of a
       good or service only if one of the following criteria is met:
       1. The entity sells the same good or service to different customers (at or
          near the same time) for a broad range of amounts (that is, the selling
          price is highly variable because a representative standalone selling
          price is not discernible from past transactions or other observable
          evidence).
       2. The entity has not yet established a price for that good or service, and
          the good or service has not previously been sold on a standalone basis
          (that is, the selling price is uncertain).
32-35 A combination of methods may need to be used to estimate the
standalone selling prices of the goods or services promised in the contract if
two or more of those goods or services have highly variable or uncertain
standalone selling prices. For example, an entity may use a residual approach
to estimate the aggregate standalone selling price for those promised goods or
services with highly variable or uncertain standalone selling prices and then use
another method to estimate the standalone selling prices of the individual
goods or services relative to that estimated aggregate standalone selling price
determined by the residual approach. When an entity uses a combination of
methods to estimate the standalone selling price of each promised good or
service in the contract, the entity shall evaluate whether allocating the
transaction price at those estimated standalone selling prices would be
consistent with the allocation objective in paragraph 606-10-32-28 and the
guidance on estimating standalone selling prices in paragraph 606-10-32-33.


The stand-alone selling price is the price at which an entity would sell a
promised good or service separately to a customer. The best evidence of this is
an observable price from stand-alone sales (which includes stand-alone
renewals) of the good or service to similarly situated customers. A contractually
stated price or list price could be the stand-alone selling price of that good or
service, but this is not presumed to be the case and would need to be
supported by other evidence.
If the stand-alone selling price is not directly observable, then the entity
estimates the amount using a suitable method as illustrated below. In limited
circumstances, an entity may estimate the amount using the residual approach.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         397
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                            Allocate based on relative stand-alone selling prices

 Performance obligation 1                      Performance obligation 2                       Performance obligation 3


                                       Determine stand-alone selling prices

                                         Is an observable price available?

                     Yes                                                                 No


    Use the observable
                                                                           Estimate price
           price



                                                Adjusted                                                     Residual
                                                                           Expected cost
                                                 market                                                  approach (only
                                                                           plus a margin
                                               assessment                                                   in limited
                                                                             approach
                                                approach                                                 circumstances)



Estimating stand-alone selling prices
An entity considers all information that is reasonably available when estimating
a stand-alone selling price – e.g. market conditions, entity-specific factors and
information about the customer or class of customer. It also maximizes the use
of observable inputs and applies consistent methods to estimate the stand-
alone selling price of other goods or services with similar characteristics.
Topic 606 does not preclude or prescribe any particular method for estimating
the stand-alone selling price for a good or service when observable prices are
not available but describes the following estimation methods as possible
approaches.


        Adjusted market                        Evaluate the market in which goods or services are
          assessment                           sold and estimate the price that customers in the
           approach                            market would be willing to pay



                                               Forecast the expected costs of satisfying a
    Expected cost plus a
                                               performance obligation and then add an appropriate
     margin approach
                                               margin for that good or service



      Residual approach                        Subtract the sum of the observable stand-alone
           (limited                            selling prices of other goods or services promised in
       circumstances)                          the contract from the total transaction price



Often, there will not be observable stand-alone selling prices for all of the goods
or services in a contract with a customer. As a result, significant judgment will
often be involved in estimating a stand-alone selling price of those goods or



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         398
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



services. While some entities may already have robust processes in place,
others will need to develop new processes with appropriate internal controls for
estimating stand-alone selling prices of goods or services that are not typically
sold separately.
Reasonably available information that may be considered in developing these
processes might include:
— reasonably available data points: e.g. costs incurred to provide the good
  or service such as the cost of providing professional services (e.g.
  implementation, training or services), profit margins, supporting
  documentation to establish price lists, third party or industry pricing, and
  contractually stated prices;
— market conditions: e.g. market demand, competition, market constraints,
  awareness of the product and market trends;
— entity-specific factors: e.g. pricing strategies and objectives, market share
  and pricing practices for bundled arrangements; and
— information about the customer or class of customer: e.g. type of
  customer, geography or distribution channels.
The following framework may be a useful tool for estimating and documenting
the stand-alone selling price and for establishing internal controls over the
estimation process.


                                  Gather all reasonably available data points



        Consider adjustments based on market conditions and entity-specific factors



                Consider the need to stratify selling prices into meaningful groups



                       Weigh available information and make the best estimate



                      Establish processes for ongoing monitoring and evaluation




                  Question E10
                  Must an entity establish a stand-alone selling price
                  for each performance obligation?
Interpretive response: Yes. The stand-alone selling price is determined at
contract inception for each performance obligation. Topic 606 does not require
that the amount can be ‘reliably’ estimated, nor does it prescribe another
threshold. An entity is required to maximize the use of observable inputs when
it estimates the stand-alone selling price, but in all circumstances, it will need to



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         399
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



arrive at a stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation and allocate
the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract.
There are no circumstances in which revenue recognition is postponed because
the determination of a stand-alone selling price is difficult or highly subjective.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance, a delivered
item (e.g. a software license delivered upfront) was only accounted for as a
separate element of the arrangement if the software entity had VSOE for all of
the undelivered elements (e.g. PCS, professional services, hosting services, or
any specified update or specified additional software product). If the entity did
not have VSOE for all undelivered items, the delivered item (typically a software
license) was combined with the undelivered items and the revenue attributable
to those items was generally recognized either over the period the services
were provided (e.g. in the case of PCS or professional services) or at the point
in time the undelivered item was delivered (e.g. when a specified upgrade
was delivered).
In contrast, under Topic 606, the presence or absence of VSOE for undelivered
items has no effect on whether two promised goods or services in a software
licensing arrangement are separate performance obligations. For entities that
were not able to establish VSOE for the undelivered items in their software
arrangements, the elimination of the VSOE requirement will result in more
items in software licensing arrangements being accounted for as separate
performance obligations. For these entities, this will generally mean that some
of the arrangement consideration will be recognized earlier (i.e. when control of
the software license transfers to the customer) than under the legacy guidance.



                  Question E20
                  How often does an entity need to establish a stand-
                  alone selling price for a particular performance
                  obligation?
Interpretive response: It depends. As noted in Question E10, an entity is
required to estimate the stand-alone selling price at contract inception for each
performance obligation in a contract. However, the stand-alone selling prices for
previously allocated arrangements are not revised even if the stand-alone selling
price changes after contract inception but before satisfying all of the
performance obligations in a contract. In the case of a contract modification that
is not accounted for as a separate contract, the entity would use stand-alone
selling prices at the date of the modification to account for the modified
contract (see Chapter G – Contract modifications).
The stand-alone selling price should be determined for each performance
obligation at contract inception and should reflect currently available
information, including shifts in pricing, customer base, product offerings or



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         400
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



technology. Practically, the frequency of updating the estimated stand-alone
selling prices for the purposes of accounting for new contracts will vary based
on the nature of the performance obligations, the markets in which they are
being sold and various entity-specific factors. For example, a new product
offering, new geographical market, goods or services in a highly competitive
market or high rate of technological changes may require more frequent
updates to the estimated stand-alone selling price as market awareness and
demand change. In contrast, when the products, markets and customer base
are more stable, some entities may reasonably conclude that the stand-alone
selling price of a performance obligation does not change frequently.
Depending on the particular facts and circumstances some entities may
reasonably be able to conclude that stand-alone selling prices established on a
monthly, quarterly or annual basis would reflect the stand-alone pricing for that
entire time period. Entities will need to establish a monitoring process in order
to ensure the stand-alone selling prices used appropriately reflect the current
circumstances at the inception of each contract.



                  Question E30
                  Could a single good or service have more than one
                  stand-alone selling price?
Interpretive response: Yes. Paragraph 606-10-32-32 states the best evidence
of stand-alone selling price is the price when the good or service is sold
separately in similar circumstances and to similar customers. As such, the
stand-alone selling price of a particular good or service could vary based on the
circumstances and type or class of customer.
When determining the stand-alone selling price for a good or service, an entity
should consider stratifying stand-alone selling prices into meaningful groups and
identifying a different stand-alone selling price for each group. The groups could
be based on customer type, volume of sales to customers, geography,
distribution channel or other relevant groupings.



                  Question E40
                  Is the stand-alone selling price required to be a
                  point estimate or can it be a range of prices?
Interpretive response: A point estimate is required in order to allocate the
transaction price to the performance obligations for a given contract. However, it
may be acceptable for a point estimate to be drawn from a range of prices when
that range is sufficiently narrow. Using a range would be most appropriate when
stand-alone selling prices are expected to vary somewhat for similar types of
customers. A range should be narrow and based on an analysis that maximizes
observable inputs and supports an assertion that any price within that range
would be a valid pricing point if the performance obligation were sold on a stand-
alone basis.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         401
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Topic 606 does not discuss ranges of prices. Accordingly, entities will need to
exercise judgment in establishing that its range of prices is sufficiently narrow
under the circumstances. One approach that would maximize observable inputs
would be a bell-shaped curve approach. Under this approach, an entity would
evaluate whether stand-alone prices during recent periods are sufficiently
clustered within a narrow range.
When the dispersion in stand-alone prices is so wide that a relevant price is not
determinable from the observable transactions, an entity should use another
method to estimate the stand-alone selling price. That is, the entity would
estimate the stand-alone selling price using the adjusted market assessment,
expected costs plus margin, or residual approaches (see Question E80).
However, the observable prices would still be used as a data point in the
estimate of the stand-alone selling price of the performance obligation.
It would not be appropriate to establish a range of observable transactions and
then arbitrarily expand the range by a certain percentage on either side of the
observable range to create a reasonable range of estimated stand-alone selling
prices. Similarly, it would not be appropriate to derive a point estimate (i.e. a
stand-alone selling price that is not based on observable selling prices) and
arbitrarily add a range of a certain percentage on either side of the
point estimate.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The approach and methods available for establishing a range of stand-alone
selling prices could require more judgment than the legacy practice of
establishing VSOE, for which acceptable practice was more established.
However, a range that was sufficient to establish VSOE under legacy US GAAP
would likely be sufficiently narrow to establish a range under Topic 606.



                  Question E50
                  Can the stated contractual price be the stand-alone
                  selling price?
Interpretive response: It depends. Paragraph 606-10-32-32 states that a
contractually stated price may be (but shall not be presumed to be) the stand-
alone selling price of that good or service. To that end, contractually stated
prices may provide a relevant data point when determining the estimated stand-
alone selling price of a good or service in some cases.
If the stated price in the contract is developed using methods and assumptions
consistent with an entity’s normal pricing processes and practices for stand-
alone sales of the good or service, the contract price may be useful in the
analysis. This is particularly the case if the stated prices for the good or service
are reasonably consistent across similar customers regardless of what other
goods or services are bundled in the arrangement or the good or service is sold




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         402
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



separately and the cash consideration tied to the delivery of the good or service
is consistent with its stated price.
When the stated contract price is at stand-alone selling price or is a price within
a sufficiently narrow range of observable stand-alone selling prices, it may be
appropriate to use the stated contract price as the estimated stand-alone selling
price of a good or service. However, if the stated contract price for any of the
performance obligations in the arrangement is not an appropriate estimate of
the stand-alone selling price, then it will be necessary for the entity to use
other information in developing the stand-alone selling price for that
performance obligation.



                  Example E50.1
                  Allocating the transaction price based on stated
                  contract prices
Entity N sells one-year of SaaS and upfront implementation services for a total
fee of $555,000. Entity N determines that the SaaS and the implementation
services are separate performance obligations (see Question C280). There is no
variable consideration, or discounts that are required to be allocated entirely to
one or more but not all of the performance obligations.
The stated contract prices for the goods and services are as follows.

 Performance obligation                                                                                    Contract price
 One year of SaaS                                                                                                  $505,000
 Implementation services                                                                                               50,000
 Total                                                                                                             $555,000


N has established a sufficiently narrow range of observable stand-alone selling
prices for its SaaS and implementation services.

 Performance obligation                                                   Range of stand-alone selling prices
 One year of SaaS                                                                                $500,000 to $525,000
 Implementation services                                                                            $48,000 to $50,000


Because the stated contract prices for SaaS and implementation services fall
within the narrow ranges, the stated contract price may be used, without
adjustment, to allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                             Revenue for software and SaaS                                      403
     E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E60
                  When the stand-alone selling price is a range, what
                  point in the range should the entity use as the
                  stand-alone selling price when the stated price in
                  the contract is outside that range?
Interpretive response: An entity should develop policies for estimating stand-
alone selling prices that are consistent with the allocation objective and are
applied consistently. This may include a consistent policy to determine which
price in the range of stand-alone selling prices should be used as the stand-
alone selling price for purposes of determining the transaction price allocation.
For example, an entity may consider a policy of using either (1) the midpoint of
the range or (2) the outer limit of the range nearest to the stated contract price
for that performance obligation.



                  Example E60.1
                  Contract prices are not at stand-alone selling price
Assume the same facts as Example E50.1 except that the total fee for the
arrangement is $540,000, with stated contract prices of $485,000 for the SaaS
and $55,000 for the implementation services. N’s policy is to use the midpoint
of its narrow range of observable stand-alone selling prices when stated
contract prices fall outside the established ranges when performing the relative
stand-alone selling price allocation.
Because the stated prices for the SaaS and implementation services fall outside
their respective estimated selling price ranges, consistent with its policy, N
allocates the transaction price using the midpoints of the ranges, as follows.

 Performance                                               Stand-alone              Selling price                      Price
 obligation                      Stated price              selling price                    ratio                 allocation
 One year of SaaS
 (midpoint of
 range)                               $485,000                   $512,5001                    91.3%                $493,020
 Implementation
 services (midpoint
 of range)                                55,000                    49,0002                    8.7%                    46,980
 Total                                $540,000                  $561,500                    100.0%                 $540,000

Notes:
1.     Mid-point of range $500,000 – $525,000 is used because stated contract price is outside
       the narrow range.
2.     Mid-point of range $48,000 – $50,000 is used because stated contract price is outside
       the narrow range.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         404
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E70
                  Is an entity required to use an observable stand-
                  alone selling price as the stand-alone selling price
                  for a distinct good or service if one exists?
Interpretive response: Yes. If observable stand-alone selling prices can be
obtained those prices must be used. While the Boards did not specify a
hierarchy of evidence to determine the stand-alone selling price of a good or
service, paragraph BC276 states that Topic 606 requires an entity to use
observable prices when a good or service is sold separately. However, stand-
alone historical sales may not be determinative on their own.
Paragraph 606-10-32-32 states that the best evidence of stand-alone selling
price is the observable price when the entity sells that good or service
separately (which would include the price of actual renewals for PCS and when-
and-if upgrades) in similar circumstances and to similar customers. However, if
the entity is selling the good or service in a new market, to a new customer
type or under different circumstances (e.g. market factors have affected the
pricing for the particular good or service), then other data points may be more
relevant. In that situation, the historical sales should be used as an observable
input in developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price for that new
circumstance. We would expect an entity to use the most relevant stand-alone
sales prices and adjust based on other relevant factors to determine the stand-
alone selling price.
When the historical stand-alone sales are not within a sufficiently narrow range,
those sales may not provide evidence of an observable stand-alone selling price
because the range is so wide that an appropriate pricing point is not observable.
In that situation, an entity will need to estimate the stand-alone selling price
using another method that maximizes the use of observable inputs (that would
include those historical sales as inputs). See Question E40 on determining an
observable stand-alone selling price that is a range.
An entity may sell a good or service separately, but only on occasion. In this
situation, the entity would evaluate whether the historical sales for that good or
service when it is sold separately are indicative of the price that it would charge
in a similar situation. For example, if the entity has not sold a software product
on a stand-alone basis within a reasonable period of time before the current
transaction (e.g. six months to one year), the previous sales price for that
product may not be indicative of the stand-alone selling price of the product in
the current contract. In that situation, the entity may not have an observable
stand-alone selling price and should estimate the stand-alone selling price
using another approach. However, the historical sales should be considered in
the estimate.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         405
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E80
                  Does an entity have a ‘free choice’ in selecting a
                  method for estimating the stand-alone selling price
                  for a good or service when the entity has
                  determined the good or service does not have an
                  observable stand-alone selling price?
Interpretive response: No. An entity must select the method that maximizes
the use of observable inputs. Paragraph 606-10-32-34 discusses suitable
methods for estimating stand-alone selling prices but does not specify a
hierarchy or preference to those methods – other than that it restricts the
circumstances in which an entity may use a residual approach (see Question
E90) and states that the estimation method used should maximize the use of
observable inputs. Topic 606 does not preclude or prescribe any particular
method for estimating a stand-alone selling price provided the estimate is a
faithful representation of the price at which the entity would sell the distinct
good or service as if it were sold separately to the customer. [606-10-32-33, ASU
2014-09.BC268]

Because entities are required to maximize the use of observable inputs, entities
would look first at estimation techniques that rely on observable inputs before
using techniques more heavily reliant on non-observable inputs. Consider the
following situations.
— Assume an entity has observable inputs (stand-alone sales that are not
  sufficiently clustered around a narrow range or third-party sales of a similar
  good or service), while its fulfillment costs (see Question E160) information
  does not provide relevant data. In that case, the entity would use the
  adjusted market assessment approach (using the observable entity and
  third-party sales inputs) rather than estimating the stand-alone selling price
  based on the non-relevant cost data (i.e. using an expected cost plus a
  margin approach).
— In contrast, assume an entity has observable, reliable historical cost data for
  similar goods or services but observable third-party pricing for similar goods
  or services is not consistent. The entity would likely conclude that the
  expected cost plus a margin approach is more appropriate. However, if the
  entity has observable market data, such as competitor pricing or stand-
  alone sales, the entity would still consider those data points when
  evaluating the appropriateness of the cost plus margin estimate.
— If an entity has either observable market data or observable cost plus
  margin data and either of those approaches provides a faithful
  representation of the stand-alone selling price, those approaches would be
  used before the residual approach because they maximize the use of
  observable inputs. In contrast, the lack of direct observable market inputs or
  cost data for a particular good or service may result in a conclusion that the
  residual approach is the estimation approach that maximizes observable
  inputs because the residual approach uses the observable inputs from the
  other goods or services in the contract. Note, however, that the residual
  approach may only be used in certain circumstances (See Question E90).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         406
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Ultimately, when an observable stand-alone selling price is not available, the
use of an alternative measure is not a free choice. In all cases, the entity’s
estimate of the stand-alone selling price should maximize the use of
observable inputs.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP for non-software arrangements, the arrangement
consideration was allocated to all deliverables meeting the separation criteria on
the basis of their relative selling price, unless some other specific guidance
applied – e.g. software arrangements and separately priced warranty contracts
– and subject to contingent consideration restrictions (i.e. the contingent cash
cap). Legacy multiple-element arrangement guidance required an entity to
determine the selling price for each deliverable using the following hierarchy:
— vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of the selling price, if it existed;
— third-party evidence of the selling price, if VSOE did not exist; or
— the best estimate of the selling price, if neither VSOE nor third-party
  evidence existed.
Similar to the requirement to use VSOE first, Topic 606 requires an entity to use
‘observable prices’ (which might be a different threshold than VSOE) when it
sells a good or service separately. However, Topic 606 does not prescribe an
explicit hierarchy or a particular method for estimating the stand-alone selling
price when an observable price is not available. Rather, it requires an entity to
maximize the use of observable inputs in estimating the stand-alone selling
price of the good or service.
For example, even if an entity can obtain third-party evidence of the selling
price, the entity may be able to use an alternative estimation method provided
the alternative method equally maximizes the use of observable inputs.
Whereas, under legacy US GAAP, an entity would be required to use third-party
evidence before establishing its best estimate of the selling price using an
alternative approach.
In practice under legacy US GAAP, third-party evidence of selling price of
substantially similar goods or services could be difficult to support and entities
may have developed best estimates of selling price using other approaches.
The adjusted market assessment approach under Topic 606 is similar to,
but not the equivalent of third-party evidence of selling price under legacy
US GAAP. Under Topic 606, the adjusted market assessment approach is not
limited to third-party pricing of a similar good or service. Rather, the third-party
sales would be considered observable inputs that the entity could use in making
its market assessment estimate. For example, even if a third-party sale did not
qualify as third-party evidence under legacy US GAAP, under Topic 606 the
entity could consider those sales as observable data points and then make
appropriate adjustments to estimate the stand-alone selling price of the good
or service.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         407
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E90
                  When can a software entity use the residual
                  approach?
Interpretive response: The residual approach is appropriate only if the stand-
alone selling price of one or more goods or services is highly variable or
uncertain, and observable stand-alone selling prices can be established for the
other goods or services promised in the contract.

  Selling price is…                 …if…
  Highly variable                   The entity sells the same good or service to different
                                    customers at or near the same time for a broad range of prices
  Uncertain                         The entity has not yet established the price for a good or
                                    service and the good or service has not previously been sold
                                    on a stand-alone basis


If two or more goods or services in a contract have highly variable or uncertain
stand-alone selling prices, then an entity may need to use a combination of
methods to estimate the stand-alone selling prices of the performance
obligations in the contract. For example, an entity may use:
— the residual approach to estimate the aggregate stand-alone selling prices
  for all of the promised goods or services with highly variable or uncertain
  stand-alone selling prices; and then
— another technique to estimate the stand-alone selling prices of the
  individual goods or services in the bundle that was determined by the
  residual approach.
The residual approach is appropriate for estimating the stand-alone selling price
of a software license when, and only when, the selling price is highly variable or
uncertain. Further, there is often little or no incremental cost to the software
entity (so a cost plus a margin approach would be inappropriate) and the
software product may not have substantially similar market equivalents from
which to derive a market assessment. As a consequence, in the case of a
software license the residual approach will frequently be the method that
maximizes the use of observable inputs.
However, another approach may be more appropriate for other goods or
services even if the criteria to use the residual approach are met. Topic 606
requires that the method used to estimate stand-alone selling price should
maximize the use of observable inputs (see Question E80) and when there are
observable inputs such as third-party pricing or cost and margin data from
selling similar goods or services another approach may be more appropriate.
The residual approach should be used only when the criteria are met and the
approach results in an estimated selling price at which the entity would sell the
promised good or service separately. See also Question E100.
Software licenses are not typically sold separately and may be offered in a wide
range of differently priced bundles. Software vendors will need to consider both
quantitative and qualitative factors to determine whether the selling price of
software or a bundle of goods or services is highly variable or uncertain. See




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         408
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Question E110 for considerations on whether the selling price of a bundled
software license is highly variable. See Question E120 for considerations on
whether the selling price of a good or service is uncertain.


                  Example E90.1
                  Estimating stand-alone selling price – residual
                  approach
Software Vendor M enters into a contract to provide rights to use Licenses S
and T for three years, as well as technical support for both licenses. The
contract price is $100,000.
M has identified four performance obligations in the contract: License S;
technical support for License S; License T; and technical support for License T.
M determines that the licenses and the related technical support are each
distinct and, therefore, separate performance obligations (see Questions C120
and C160).
The stand-alone observable price of $12,500 is available for the technical
support for each of the licenses, based on renewals that are sold separately at
that price. However, the prices at which M has sold licenses similar to Licenses
S and T to similar customers in other bundled transactions have been in a broad
range – i.e. selling prices of the licenses are highly variable and not directly
observable. Also, the level of discounting in the bundled arrangements varies
based on negotiations with individual customers.
M determines the stand-alone selling prices of the performance obligations in
the contract as follows.

                                                Stand-alone
 Performance obligation                         selling price                                                     Approach
 Licenses S and T                                      $ 75,000            Residual approach ($100,000 – $12,500 –
                                                                                                          $12,500)

 Technical support for License S                          12,500                                 Directly observable price

 Technical support for License T                          12,500                                 Directly observable price

 Total                                                 $100,000

The residual approach is used to estimate the stand-alone selling price for the
bundle of products (Licenses S and T) with highly variable selling prices.
Because the licenses will transfer to the customer at different points in time, M
then estimates the stand-alone selling price of each license. It does this by
allocating the $75,000 to Licenses S and T based on the average residual stand-
alone selling price for each license over the past year, as follows.

                          Average residual                                             Price
 Product                      selling price                      Ratio            allocation                   Calculation
 License S                             $ 40,000                   40%                $30,000            ($75,000 × 40%)
 License T                                 60,000                 60%                  45,000           ($75,000 × 60%)
 Total                                 $100,000                                      $75,000




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         409
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



The approach used by M to estimate the stand-alone selling prices of
Licenses S and T is an example of one approach that may be acceptable;
however, other approaches may be acceptable (e.g. estimating the stand-alone
price based on the entity’s internal pricing practices) if they are consistent with
the allocation objective and maximize the use of observable inputs.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Using the residual approach to estimate stand-alone selling prices under
Topic 606 may yield similar results to legacy guidance on multiple-element
arrangements in some circumstances.
Although the residual approach is not permitted for estimating the selling price
under the legacy US GAAP guidance applicable to transactions that do not
include a software license, the amount that would be allocated may be one of
several data points identified when developing an estimated selling price for the
delivered element. In addition, the use of the residual method of allocation was
permitted in legacy US GAAP for:
— software arrangements in which the entire discount was allocated to the
  delivered item(s) in the contract and for which there was VSOE for all of the
  remaining undelivered elements in the contract; and
— deliverables bundled together with a separately priced extended warranty
  or maintenance obligation, in which the stated price was allocated to that
  obligation and the residual was allocated to the remaining deliverables in
  the contract.
The residual approach under Topic 606 differs from the residual method
permitted under legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance,
in that:
— it can be used to develop an estimate of the stand-alone selling price of a
  good or service, rather than to determine the allocation of consideration to a
  specific performance obligation – although in many circumstances it will
  result in the same outcome;
— the amount allocated to the delivered item could be zero under legacy
  US GAAP; however, that would not be appropriate under Topic 606 (see
  Question E100);
— its application is not limited to delivered items – i.e. a reverse residual
  approach is allowed if the requirements for its use are met for an
  undelivered performance obligation; and
— it requires only observable stand-alone selling prices of other goods or services
  that are promised in the contract, which may allow greater application of the
  residual method than the requirement to establish VSOE.
Given that an entity is no longer required to have VSOE for all the undelivered
items in a software arrangement, and it is required to estimate the stand-alone
selling price for each distinct good or service, Topic 606 may accelerate revenue
recognition for many multiple-element software arrangements.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         410
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E100
                  Can the residual approach result in zero or very
                  little consideration allocated to a good or service?

Interpretive response: No. If applying the residual approach results in zero or
very little consideration being allocated to a good or service, or to a bundle of
goods or services, then this outcome may not be reasonable. (Note that this is
different to allocating consideration between items that are and are not in the
scope of Topic 606, which may result in little or no consideration being allocated
to the aggregate of the items that are in the scope of Topic 606 – see Chapter A
– Scope).
If an entity has determined that a good or service is distinct, then by definition it
has value to the customer on a stand-alone basis. In this case, an entity
considers all reasonably available data and whether the stand-alone selling price
of that good or service should be estimated using another method.



                  Question E110
                  How should an entity evaluate whether the selling
                  price of a software license that is always bundled
                  with PCS is highly variable?
Interpretive response: In order to apply the residual method, the selling price
of the good or service must be highly variable or uncertain. Paragraph 606-10-
32-34(c)(1) states that the selling price of a good or service is highly variable if
“the entity sells the same good or service to different customers (at or near the
same time) for a broad range of amounts (that is, the selling price is highly
variable because a representative stand-alone selling price is not discernible
from past transactions or other observable evidence).”
Software entities commonly sell software licenses bundled with other goods
and services such as PCS. Often the software license is never sold on a stand-
alone basis and is always bundled with such services. As a result, the stand-
alone selling price of the license is not directly observable, and an entity will
need to estimate the stand-alone selling price of the license.
When the entity has not sold a license on a stand-alone basis it may not be
clear whether the selling price is highly variable. That is because without stand-
alone sales the entity may not easily be able to establish that the license was
sold for a broad range of amounts.
An entity may be able to evaluate whether the selling price of a license that is
always sold with PCS is highly variable by evaluating the pricing of the bundle.
This is because the nature of the combined items, lack of observable data
points and significance of the license to the overall arrangement could indicate
that the variability was attributable to the license. However, if an entity sold a
bundle that includes items other than a license and PCS (e.g. a bundle of
professional services and a license), it would need to consider the nature of the
bundled items before evaluating the pricing of the bundle. In other cases, the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         411
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



nature of bundled goods or services (e.g. implementation services) may make it
less likely that the value of the license is driving the variability in pricing.
In cases where the pricing of a bundled license and PCS is highly variable, it
generally would be reasonable to conclude the selling price of the license is
highly variable. Consider the following examples:
— The selling price of the bundle is highly variable, and the entity has
  observable stand-alone selling price for PCS based on a fixed dollar
  amount. For example, if the entity has consistently priced PCS through
  renewals such that it has established a fixed dollar observable stand-alone
  selling price (or a narrow range of prices), it would be reasonable to
  conclude that highly variable pricing of the bundle is related to the license.
  For example, if the stand-alone selling price of PCS was $100 and the entity
  sold the license and bundled PCS between $500 and $1,000 that might
  indicate that the range of the license was between $400 and $900.
— The selling price of the bundle is highly variable and observable prices
  of PCS are based on a percentage of the stated license fee. When PCS
  is priced as a percentage of a stated license fee that varies from customer
  to customer, the license fee would be highly variable from a fixed dollar
  perspective and it would be reasonable to conclude that the selling price of
  the license is driving the variability in the pricing of the bundle.
When the stand-alone selling price of a license and bundled PCS is highly
variable, the contract may also include additional performance obligations with
observable stand-alone selling prices. In that case, the residual approach may
first be used to allocate consideration between the bundle and the performance
obligation(s) with observable selling prices. This might occur, for example, in an
arrangement to provide a license, PCS and professional services when the
entity has an observable stand-alone selling price for the professional services
and highly variable pricing for the license and PCS as a bundle.



                  Question E120
                  How should an entity evaluate whether it has
                  established a price when it has not yet sold a good
                  or service separately – i.e. whether the selling price
                  is uncertain?
Interpretive response: In order to apply the residual approach, the selling price
of the good or service must be highly variable or uncertain. Paragraph 606-10-
32-34(c)(2) states that the selling price of a good or service is uncertain if “the
entity has not yet established a price for that good or service, and the good or
service has not previously been sold on a standalone basis (that is, the selling
price is uncertain).”
Even when an entity has not sold a good or service on a stand-alone basis, it
may still have established a price for the good or service. That is because the
entity may have established an internal list price or made an offer to a customer
at that price.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         412
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



It may be difficult to demonstrate that an entity has established a price until a
good or service has been sold separately on a regular basis. However, the
selling price could still be uncertain if the good or service has been sold
separately but those sales are infrequent or not current.
A price could be established price when an entity has set a price for a good or
service based on its customary business practices if the entity expects that the
good or service will regularly be sold separately at that price. That is because
the price may not be substantive without the expectation of entering into
separate sales at that price.
When evaluating whether a price has been established before stand-alone
sales, an entity will need to apply significant judgment and should consider the
following when making its evaluation (not exhaustive).
— Other observable inputs provide evidence that the price has been
  established. For example, if third-party pricing for similar products is
  consistent with the price the entity set, that would indicate that the price is
  not uncertain.
— The length of time between when the price is set and when the entity
  expects to sell the good or service. The greater the length of time until, or
  uncertainty about when, the good or service will be sold, the higher the
  likelihood that the price is uncertain.
— The entity’s historical experience of selling previously released goods or
  services for the price set by management. If the entity has a history of
  setting a price and that price changes before selling the good or service
  separately it would indicate that the price is uncertain.
— The frequency of which the entity expects to sell the good or service on a
  stand-alone basis. If the entity does not expect to sell the good or service
  separately on a regular basis, it would indicate the price is uncertain
  because an expectation of regular stand-alone sales might change how an
  entity sets the price for the good or service.
— The entity has offered customers a contractually stated renewal price and has
  a history of customers exercising the option at that stated price for similar
  goods and services. If a customer has not yet exercised an option to renew,
  the price may still be uncertain if the entity has a history of customers
  renegotiating the contract to purchase a renewal at a different price.
— The nature of the good or service and the entity’s experience with similar
  products. If the goods or services are based on a new technology or service
  offering and the entity lacks historical experience to demonstrate that a
  price established will be used in stand-alone sales, the selling price may be
  uncertain. In contrast, if the new good or service is similar to existing goods
  or services provided by the entity or goods or services sold by competitors,
  there might be more certainty in the selling price.
Even if the selling price is considered uncertain, an entity is required to
maximize the use of observable inputs in estimating the stand-alone selling
price of a good or service. The presence of contractually stated prices for
renewal options, stand-alone sales of similar products, or third-party sales of
similar goods or services would likely be considered observable data points that
an entity would need to consider in its estimation process and therefore it




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         413
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



might conclude that a method other than the residual approach should be used
in estimating the stand-alone selling price even if the entity has concluded that
the price is uncertain.



                  Question E130
                  Can the stand-alone selling price of PCS be
                  expressed as a percentage of the license fee?

Interpretive response: It depends. The stand-alone selling price of PCS can be
expressed as a percentage of a stated license fee or a fixed dollar amount. A
history of stand-alone sales at a consistent percentage of the stated license fee
to which the PCS relates establishes a value relationship between the PCS and
license that can be indicative of the stand-alone selling price of each. However,
all facts and circumstances should be considered, and a renewal rate expressed
as a percentage of the stated license fee is not automatically considered to be
the stand-alone selling price for PCS.
Having a stated PCS renewal rate that is ‘substantive’ is not enough to use that
renewal rate as the stand-alone selling price of the PCS. However, an entity can
establish an observable stand-alone selling price for the PCS expressed as a
percentage of the stated license fee if that pricing is consistent with the entity’s
normal pricing practices and it has a sufficient history of customers renewing at
a substantially similar percentage.
Similar to establishing a stand-alone selling price at a fixed dollar amount, the
entity could stratify its population of PCS sales into meaningful groups when
determining the consistency of pricing. Further, the entity could establish a
range of percentages as the observable input to determining the stand-alone
selling price if the range is sufficiently narrow. However, if the actual renewal
percentages are highly variable, further analysis and refinement will be required
to meet the allocation objective for the performance obligations in bundled
arrangements.
Estimating the stand-alone selling price
If observable stand-alone sales (i.e. renewals) are not consistent enough to
establish an observable percentage (or narrow range of percentages) as the
stand-alone selling price for the PCS, an entity would need to estimate the
stand-alone selling price of the PCS. An estimated, rather than observable,
stand-alone selling price can still be expressed as a percentage of a stated
license fee, and as with other stand-alone selling price estimates, the entity’s
estimation approach must maximize the use of observable inputs. Because
renewals at stated percentages are an observable input, they would be a valid
data point in the estimate (i.e. even if not tightly banded enough to produce an
observable stand-alone selling price). In addition, an entity might consider
industry benchmarks, competitor pricing at similar renewal percentages, the
entity’s pricing practices and other relevant, observable data points in
developing an estimated stand-alone selling price for PCS expressed as a
percentage.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         414
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP guidance, a PCS renewal rate expressed as a
percentage of the stated license fee constitutes vendor-specific objective
evidence of fair value (VSOE) for PCS if the renewal percentage was
substantive. This could be the case even if the PCS was renewed for differing
amounts (i.e. because the stated license fee differed from contract-to-contract).
Because Topic 606 refers to observable pricing as the amount that the good or
service is sold on a stand-alone basis, if the renewal percentage is not priced
consistently from customer to customer, the stated percentage may not be
representative of the stand-alone selling price even if it were determined to be
substantive under legacy US GAAP.
Even if a renewal rate of the stated license fee is not considered an observable
stand-alone selling price, under Topic 606, an entity would still be required to
separate PCS from a license if both are distinct (as would typically be the case –
see Questions C160 and C170). While under Subtopic 985-605 if VSOE were
not established the PCS and license could not be separated.
If the PCS renewal rate was substantive under legacy GAAP but is not a
representative stand-alone selling price (which may still be a percentage of the
license fee) under Topic 606, the amounts allocated to PCS and the license
could be different.



                  Example E130.1
                  Contractually stated renewal rates of PCS expressed
                  as a percentage of a license fee
KF Corp enters into a contract with Customer X to provide a perpetual software
license to Product A and technical support and unspecified updates, upgrades,
and enhancements (collectively, PCS) for a period of one year commencing with
the transfer of the license. After conclusion of the initial PCS period, PCS may
be renewed annually for an amount equal to 20% of the stated license fee of
$1,000,000. The stated price of PCS in the initial contract was $200,000.
KF concludes that the software license and PCS are two performance
obligations (see Questions C150 – C170).
KF consistently prices PCS renewals at 20% of the stated license fee for
Product A and has an established history of customers renewing at that
percentage. However, the price of the license is uncertain because the entity
has never sold a license to Product A separately and has not established a price
for it.
KF concludes that it has observable inputs to establish the stand-alone selling
price for Product A PCS as 20% of the stated license fee because it has a
history of observable renewals priced at 20% of the stated license fee. This
establishes an observable value relationship between the license and the PCS.
As a result, it concludes that the stand-alone selling prices of the PCS and the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         415
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



license are $200,000 ($1 million × 20%) and $1 million, respectively. As a result,
KF allocates $200,000 to the PCS and $1 million to the license.
KF concludes that this allocation of the transaction price is consistent with the
allocation objective and depicts what it would expect to receive for those goods
or services because the relative allocation is consistent with its normal pricing
practices and KF’s other customers would have a similar percentage allocation.
KF also notes that using the observable relationship of the selling price between
PCS and the license fee is the approach to determining the stand-alone selling
prices of each that maximizes the use of observable inputs. This is because the
expected cost plus a margin approach would not be relevant and there are no
observable inputs directly related to the license on which to base an adjusted
market assessment approach.



                  Example E130.2
                  Contractually stated renewal rates of PCS expressed
                  as a percentage of a license fee bundled with
                  professional services
Assume the same facts as Example E130.1 except that KF enters into a
contract with Customer Y that also includes professional services priced at
$300,000. Therefore, the total contract fee is $1,500,000. The stated contract
price for professional services is commensurate with the observable stand-
alone selling price for those services.
KF has observable stand-alone selling prices for the professional services and
PCS (see Example E130.1) but the stand-alone selling price of the license is
uncertain. As a result, KF applies a residual approach to estimate the stand-
alone selling price of the license. KF allocates $300,000 to the professional
services and $200,000 to PCS. KF then estimates the stand-alone selling price
of the license to be $1,000,000 ($1,500,000 – $300,000 – $200,000).



                  Example E130.3
                  Contractually stated renewal rates of PCS expressed
                  as a percentage of a license fee – renewal rates do
                  not represent stand-alone selling price
Assume the same facts as Example E130.1 except that KF enters into a
contract with Customer Y with a stated contract license fee of $1,000,000 and a
stated renewal rate of 15%. However, KF consistently prices renewals of PCS
at 20% of the stated license fee, which is determined to be an observable input
to establishing the stand-alone selling price of the PCS.
In this situation, KF would not use the stated renewal percentage as the stand-
alone selling price of the PCS because it is not reflective of what KF would
expect to be entitled to in a contract with a similar customer − i.e. the rate in
this contract is effectively at a discount from KF’s normal pricing practices.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         416
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Similar to Example E130.1, KF concludes that the stand-alone selling price of
PCS is $200,000 (20% normal renewal price × $1,000,000). KF also evaluates
the renewal option for the presence of a material right to obtain discounted PCS
(see Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract for
a discussion of material rights).



                  Question E135
                  Can the stand-alone selling prices of a software
                  license and PCS both be expressed as percentages
                  of the transaction price?
Interpretive response: Yes. Question E130 is not intended to suggest that only
the stand-alone selling price of PCS can be expressed in the form of a
percentage. The ultimate objective of determining stand-alone selling prices for
the software license and the PCS is to permit an appropriate allocation of the
transaction price to those items on a relative basis. Therefore, it may often be
reasonable and simpler to look to the value relationship between the two items
to allocate the transaction price, instead of determining a fixed dollar estimated
stand-alone selling price for each.
Value relationship in this context simply refers to the ratio of the transaction
price to be allocated to the license and the PCS (e.g. 80/20, 40/60). Therefore,
the transaction price allocation to the license and the PCS that results from an
appropriately determined value relationship should not differ from that which
would result from using appropriately determined fixed dollar stand-alone selling
prices. As such, there is no reason to ascribe preferability to one approach
(value relationship or fixed dollar stand-alone selling prices) or the other.



                  Question E140
                  How can an entity estimate the stand-alone selling
                  prices of software term licenses and PCS sold
                  together as a bundle?
Interpretive response: Entities often sell software term licenses and PCS only
as a co-terminus bundle. If the license and the PCS are separate performance
obligations (see Questions C160 and C170), and assuming the PCS is a single
performance obligation (see Question C150), an entity will need to determine
the stand-alone selling prices of both the license and the PCS. However, if a co-
terminus license and PCS are always bundled together, both when the license
is initially granted and upon renewal, the entity will not have observable stand-
alone sales for either. As a result, the entity will need to estimate the stand-
alone selling price of each (or establish the ‘value relationship’ between the two
(see Question E135).
To estimate the stand-alone selling prices or the value relationship in these
situations, entities must apply an approach that maximizes the use of
observable inputs. Potential observable inputs include (not exhaustive):




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         417
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



— Stand-alone PCS renewals: An entity may sell PCS renewals on a stand-
  alone basis in relation to perpetual or long-term licenses of the software
  product. A perpetual (or long-term) license and a term (or shorter term)
  license for the same software product are generally similar and the nature
  of the related PCS would typically be substantially the same (i.e. both
  typically consist of the same technical support and updates and
  enhancements). A stand-alone renewal (expressed as a percentage of the
  license fee or fixed dollar amount) of PCS over the same software product
  would be an observable input that could be a starting point for the
  estimates with appropriate adjustments for the differences in rights
  between the perpetual (or longer term) licenses and term (or shorter term)
  licenses. For example, given the time restrictions on a term versus a
  perpetual license (including the time the customer will benefit from PCS-
  provided updates), the price at which an entity might sell the term license
  and PCS on a stand-alone basis may be different from the prices for a
  perpetual license and PCS.
      While not as closely related, stand-alone renewals of PCS for a similar
      software product may also constitute a reasonable starting point for the
      estimates, provided that the technical support and updates, upgrades and
      enhancements are reasonably comparable to those expected to be
      provided for the software product in question. Additional adjustments – i.e.
      in addition to those for time restrictions (perpetual versus term) – may be
      necessary for differences between the software products and the nature of
      the PCS provided for each product.
— Industry benchmarks or other external data: Industry benchmarks,
  competitor pricing for PCS renewals or publicly disclosed information of
  similar companies may be other observable inputs that can serve as starting
  points (from which to make appropriate adjustments) for estimating stand-
  alone selling prices of or the value relationship between a co-terminus
  license and PCS.
Relevant stand-alone PCS pricing data exists
When the entity or industry consistently prices renewals of PCS on a perpetual
(or long-term) license to the same or substantially similar software product as a
percentage or fixed dollar amount, it may establish an observable value
relationship between the perpetual (or long-term) license and PCS; this
established relationship may be helpful in estimating the stand-alone selling
prices for the PCS and the term license. However, adjustments to the observed
value relationship or fixed dollar stand-alone selling price of the PCS may be
appropriate. For example, an entity might consider the following (not
exhaustive).
— Economic life of the software. If the term of the license is equivalent to
  the economic life of the software, using the pricing for PCS related to a
  perpetual license may be appropriate. In contrast, if the term is shorter than
  the economic life of the software, adjustments from the perpetual pricing
  of the PCS may be necessary to reflect a different value relationship (e.g.
  because the customer will have rights to use the updates received only for
  the term of the time-based license, rather than perpetually).
— Length of the license term. The longer the term of the license, the
  generally greater value the customer obtains from PCS because the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         418
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



      customer will have the right to use any updates, upgrades or
      enhancements for a longer period of time and there is a higher likelihood
      that they are necessary to keep the software current.
— Length of the PCS term. If committed PCS in a multi-year term license
  arrangement is for more than one year (including up to the full length of the
  license), that will generally result in a greater allocation of the total
  transaction price to the PCS than in a scenario where the committed PCS is
  only for a one-year period. As such, it would not be appropriate to apply a
  renewal percentage derived from the pricing of one-year PCS to estimate
  the gross amount to be allocated to multiple years of PCS.
— Significance of PCS elements. The entity may have a history of providing
  frequent updates and enhancements such that the primary value driver of
  PCS is in those updates and enhancements. By contrast, more of the value
  of the PCS may be associated with technical support (e.g. if that technical
  support is more proactive or ‘high touch’). Depending thereon, an entity
  might make different adjustments to reflect the different value proposition
  associated with the term and perpetual license. For example, if more of the
  value from the PCS comes from technical support, the value relationship
  between the license and the PCS may be less affected by the term nature
  of the license than if most of the value of the PCS comes from the right to
  receive updates, upgrades or enhancements, which the customer will have
  rights to for only a limited time in a term license.
— Internal pricing strategies. An entity’s pricing practices between bundled
  sales of perpetual (or longer term) licenses and term licenses may be
  relevant, including the reasons for the different pricing practices.
Relevant stand-alone PCS pricing data does not exist
Some entities do not sell PCS on a stand-alone basis at all; for example, they
may not sell perpetual or long-term licenses. They only sell co-terminus
software licenses and PCS for all their software products. And many proprietary
software products do not have relevant peer products (or relevant peer
products for which observable pricing information exists).
In these circumstances, entities must still maximize the use of observable
inputs when estimating stand-alone selling prices of their software licenses and
PCS; however, identifying observable inputs may be more challenging than
when stand-alone PCS pricing data exists. We have observed that entities in
these circumstances often look to industry and peer data. For example, an
entity may look to the value relationship between a competitor’s software
licenses and PCS, implied by the competitor’s publicly available financial
statement disclosures, as a data point from which to start its own value
relationship assessment.
If an entity uses observable market information, it must be careful not to place
inappropriate reliance on that information. Inappropriate reliance may occur if
the entity uses relevant peers’ value relationships or pricing data in its own
estimates without adjusting for differences between its own software products,
licenses and PCS and those of the peer companies. The following differences
may exist that, if not adjusted for, could lead to inappropriate allocations of
transaction price (not exhaustive).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         419
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



— Differences in license terms. In general, all other things being equal, one
  would expect the value relationship to skew more heavily toward the PCS
  than the term license the longer the co-terminus license and PCS term is.
  Therefore, an entity should adjust from peers’ value relationship data if the
  entity’s license terms are shorter or longer than those of its peers.
— Importance of software updates, upgrades or enhancements. The peer
  companies’ software may be affected differently by obsolescence or
  maintenance issues than the entity’s software. If the entity is reasonably
  expected to make more frequent and/or substantive software releases than
  its peers to address these issues, one would usually expect the value
  relationship between its licenses and PCS to be more heavily weighted
  toward the PCS than that of its peers. We would expect the converse to
  also be true.
— Level of technical support. A peer company’s technical support may differ
  from the entity’s. For example, the peer company’s technical support may
  only be available during business hours, while the entity’s is available 24 ×
  7 × 365; or the entity may promise a faster issue response time. Another
  difference may be in the level of customer interaction; some technical
  support is solely response oriented (i.e. respond when called), while other
  technical support is more proactive or ‘high touch’ (e.g. proactively offering
  guidance, reviews and/or diagnostics to the customer). All else being equal,
  one would usually expect the value of PCS with proactive, higher coverage
  or faster response technical support to be greater in relation to the bundled
  software license than PCS with reactive, lesser coverage or slower
  response technical support.



                  Example E140.1
                  Estimating stand-alone selling price in a term license
                  with PCS
Assume the same facts as Example E130.1 except that KF also sells Product A
on one-year, three-year, and five-year term licenses with co-terminus PCS. The
license and PCS are separate performance obligations in the term license
arrangements (see Questions C160 and C170).
KF prices a one-year term license bundled with one year of PCS at $400,000, a
three-year license bundled with three years of PCS at $1,200,000 and a five-
year license bundled with five years of PCS at $2,000,000. KF does not sell
term licenses or PCS related to a term license separately and therefore must
estimate the stand-alone selling price of each in its customer contracts. KF also
notes that the PCS is substantially the same service as in a perpetual license
with the only difference being the term and the software product to which the
customer obtains a right of use is the same product. The economic life of
Product A is estimated to be five years.
To estimate the stand-alone selling prices for the licenses and PCS, KF starts
with the observable input available, which is the stand-alone selling price for
PCS related to a perpetual license that equates to 20% of the stated license
fee. KF also observes there is very little incremental cost of producing the
software license and providing the when-and-if-available updates, and the cost



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         420
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



of technical support is fixed so that the cost of providing the service to a single
customer does not provide a relevant data point. Further, KF’s competitors do
not sell PCS related to term licenses separately (and their software products are
different) so there are no relevant observable third-party data points available on
which to base its estimate.
As a result, KF starts with the observable input of annual PCS renewals sold on
the perpetual license at 20% of the stated license fee and makes adjustments
based on relevant differences between the term and perpetual licenses and
related PCS. The following is an example of one approach that may be
acceptable.
Scenario 1: One-year term license
KF concludes that the value relationship established between one year of PCS
and the stated license fee in a perpetual license would require an adjustment
because the one-year term is significantly less than the economic life of the
software and the customer would lose any updates after a year. As a result, the
same value relationship for a single year would not exist for PCS in a term
license compared to one year of PCS in a perpetual license.
KF estimates the appropriate adjustment based on its customary pricing
practices and reduces the value relationship of PCS to the term license to 15%.
KF’s history of updates and enhancements is that they typically are released
semi-annually and do not significantly alter the functionality of the software. As
a result, no additional adjustments are needed to take into account differences
in the term and perpetual license scenarios.
To extrapolate the amount allocated to the license and PCS based on the
adjusted perpetual license pricing, KF uses the ratio of the 15% of the net
license fee to estimate the allocation on a total contract basis. For example, in
Example E130.1 the total contract value was $1,200,000 and PCS based on
20% of the net license fee was $200,000. As such, PCS was approximately
17% ($200,000 ÷ $1,200,000) of the total contract value. The ratio used for the
term license would then be stated as [(15% × number of years) ÷ (1 + (15% ×
number of years))].
Using the same methodology, KF estimates the ratio to be 13% [15% ÷ (1 +
15%)] attributable to PCS and 87% to the license. KF allocates $52,000
($400,000 × 13%) to the PCS and $348,000 ($400,000 × 87%) to the license.
Scenario 2: Three-year term license
KF concludes that the value relationship established between one year of PCS
and the stated perpetual license fee would require an adjustment for the three-
year term license for similar reasons to the one-year term license. While the
license is for a longer period of time, KF concludes that the PCS would still have
less value than PCS associated with a perpetual license scenario; principally
because the customer will, again, only have rights to any updates received for
the term of the license (rather than perpetually). However, the value relationship
would be greater than in a one-year license scenario.
KF estimates the appropriate adjustment based on its internal pricing strategy,
which is to reduce the value relationship to 18% (i.e. from 20%) for a three-year
term license. KF estimates that 35% [(18% × 3) ÷ (1 + (18% × 3))] of the
transaction price should be allocated to PCS and 65% to the license. Therefore,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         421
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



KF allocates $420,000 ($1,200,000 × 35%) to PCS and $780,000 ($1,200,000 ×
65%) to the license.
Scenario 3: Five-year term license
KF concludes that it should use the annual stand-alone selling price percentage
of PCS in a perpetual license to estimate the allocation based on the following.
— The term covers a substantial portion of the economic life of the software,
  and KF expects the value of a five-year license and a perpetual license to be
  similar.
— The nature of the PCS is therefore substantially the same.
— KF’s internal pricing strategy prices a five-year term license consistent with
  a perpetual license with bundled PCS and annual renewals.
KF estimates that 50% of the transaction price [(20% × 5) ÷ (1 + (20% × 5))]
should be allocated to PCS and 50% should be allocated to the license. As a
result, KF estimates the stand-alone selling price of the PCS to be $1 million
(50% × $2 million total fee) and stand-alone selling price of the license is the
residual amount of $1 million. KF notes that the amount allocated to the license
and PCS is consistent with the perpetual license scenario in Example E130.1 for
the reasons outlined in the preceding paragraph.
Conclusion
The example scenarios above illustrate one way an entity may approach making
the estimate of stand-alone selling price for a term license and term license
PCS, and other approaches may be acceptable provided the entity maximizes
the use of observable inputs when developing the estimate. For example, an
entity might conclude that the stand-alone selling price of PCS in a term license
should be closer to the stand-alone selling price of PCS in a perpetual license if
the updates were more frequent and important or if more of the value
proposition of the PCS was in the technical support. In addition, the
adjustments from the perpetual PCS pricing (e.g. 20% to 18% in Scenario 2) are
based on the specific facts and circumstances and should not be assumed to
be the appropriate adjustment in all one, three or five-year term license
scenarios.



                  Question E145
                  What effect does software being ‘open-source’ have
                  on allocating transaction price between a software
                  license and co-terminus PCS?
Background: An entity may offer a substantially comparable software product
to one it licenses on an open-source basis. Open-source means entities and
individuals can access the software for free.
Entities that follow this model often offer a superior (e.g. ‘enterprise’) version of
the open-source software – e.g. a version with some additional features and
functionality – for commercial license, usually bundled with co-terminus PCS.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         422
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



In these scenarios, the question arises as to how the open-source software’s
free accessibility affects the value relationship between the entity’s enterprise
version software licenses and related PCS.
Interpretive response: In general, the approach to allocating the transaction
price between an enterprise software license and co-terminus PCS does not
differ from that outlined in Question E140.
However, in addition to the considerations outlined in that question, we believe
an entity would typically consider the availability of a significant portion of the
enterprise software’s features and functionality for free (i.e. through the open-
source software) when estimating the stand-alone selling price of the enterprise
license or determining the value relationship that exists between the license
and the PCS. In general, we believe this would usually result in:
— a lower stand-alone selling price of the enterprise software license (as
  compared to a license for similar software without an open-source version);
  and
— a value relationship between the license and the PCS more weighted
  toward the PCS.
And the greater the overlap in features and functionality between the open-
source and enterprise software versions, the (1) lower the stand-alone selling
price of the enterprise software license and (2) greater the allocation of
transaction price to the PCS versus the enterprise license. For example, all else
being equal, we would generally expect more of the transaction price to be
allocated to the PCS if the open-source version of the software has 90% of the
features and functionality of the enterprise version instead of only 50%.
The effect of the features and functionality overlap on the enterprise license
stand-alone selling price and/or the value relationship between the license and
the PCS may not directly correlate to the extent of that overlap. For example,
the difference in transaction price allocation between the 90% and 50%
scenarios in the preceding paragraph may not correlate exactly with the
quantitative difference in the overlap. This is because other factors may also
affect the stand-alone selling price of the license or the PCS, or the value
relationship that exists between the two. These factors include the following
(not exhaustive).
— Nature and timing of updates, upgrades or enhancements provided to
      open-source and enterprise users. Enterprise PCS customers may
      receive more meaningful and/or more timely updates than open-source
      software users. For example, the entity may:
      ­      focus more of its R&D efforts on improving or enhancing its enterprise-
             only features or on fixing bugs related to enterprise features; or
      ­      provide updates that apply to both the enterprise and open-source
             software versions to enterprise customers sooner than it makes those
             same updates freely available to open-source users.
      We would typically expect these (or similar enterprise benefits) to increase
      the stand-alone selling price of, and skew the value relationship more
      toward, the PCS. By contrast, if enterprise PCS customers do not receive
      benefits of this nature (or similar), that may indicate that the stand-alone
      selling prices of the enterprise license and the PCS are both affected by the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         423
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



      entity’s open-source model. In that case, the entity’s transaction price
      allocation between the enterprise software license and PCS may be less
      differentiated by this factor from that of a similar software vendor without
      an open-source version of its software.
— Enhanced technical support. We have observed that the enterprise PCS
      offered by many entities in the scope of this question often includes
      proactive or ‘high touch’ technical support (see Question E140). As stated
      in Question E140, all else being equal, one would usually expect the stand-
      alone selling price of PCS with proactive, higher coverage or faster
      response technical support to be higher in relation to the software license
      than PCS with reactive, lesser coverage or slower response technical
      support.
      In the context of this question, this means that higher-level technical
      support (versus lower-level support) could, for example, add to the value
      relationship effect of the features and functionality overlap (i.e. further skew
      the value relationship toward the PCS) or at least partially offset effects of
      the nature described in the preceding bullet of PCS that does not prioritize
      updates to enterprise PCS customers.
— Importance of enterprise-only software features. It is likely relevant to
      consider the importance customers attach to the enterprise-only software
      features. It may be clear from usage statistics or other evidence that,
      despite enterprise-only software features comprising only a small
      percentage of the total features and functionality available in the enterprise
      software, those features are disproportionately used or employed by
      enterprise customers. In that case, any adjustment to the enterprise license
      stand-alone selling price or to the proportionate value of the license in the
      license/PCS value relationship stemming from the features and functionality
      overlap likely should be smaller than it would be if the enterprise-only
      features are used in a similar fashion and with a similar frequency to open-
      source features.
      For example, if there is a 90% overlap between the enterprise and open-
      source software features, an entity would generally expect the value
      relationship to skew more toward the PCS if customers are using all
      features of the software relatively equally than if customers are using the
      enterprise-only software features more extensively than those features also
      present in the open-source software.



                  Question E150
                  Would it be acceptable to use an entity-published
                  price list as evidence to estimate a stand-alone
                  selling price?
Interpretive response: It depends. Similar to contractually stated prices for
goods or services in a contract containing multiple performance obligations,
published price listing cannot be presumed to represent an appropriate estimate
of stand-alone selling price. However, a published list price may be a relevant




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         424
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



data point that should be considered in determining the stand-alone selling price
of a good or service.
In many cases, a published price list serves as a starting point for price
negotiations for a good or service. An entity may sell certain goods or services
included on the price list on a stand-alone basis. Analyzing the discounting
practices for similar goods or services sold on a stand-alone basis can provide
observable data points that are relevant and useful in corroborating the
estimated selling price for the goods or services that are not sold on a stand-
alone basis.



                  Question E160
                  What costs should an entity consider when
                  estimating a stand-alone selling price using the
                  expected cost plus a margin approach?
Interpretive response: Paragraph 606-10-32-34 states that under the expected
cost plus a margin approach the entity could forecast its expected costs of
satisfying a performance obligation. Subtopic 340-40 provides guidance on the
accounting for costs to fulfill a contract and the costs eligible for capitalization
are costs that are directly related to the contract. As such, it would be
consistent with the requirements in paragraphs 340-40-25-7 through 25-8 to
consider the types of costs that relate directly to a contract, when estimating
costs to fulfil (i.e. satisfy) a performance obligation. Those costs are
summarized in the following table.

                                                                    Costs that should be
  Direct costs to be included
  in the estimate
                                                                    excluded from the
                                                                    estimate
                                                                                                                       
  Direct labor – e.g. employee wages                                General and administrative costs –
                                                                    unless explicitly chargeable under
                                                                    the contract

  Direct materials – e.g. supplies                                  Costs that relate to satisfied
                                                                    performance obligations

  Allocation of costs that relate                                   Costs of wasted materials, labor
  directly to the contract – e.g.                                   or other contract costs
  depreciation and amortization

  Costs that are explicitly chargeable                              Costs that do not clearly relate to
  to the customer under the contract                                unsatisfied performance
                                                                    obligations




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         425
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                                                                    Costs that should be
  Direct costs to be included
  in the estimate
                                                                    excluded from the
                                                                    estimate
                                                                                                                       
  Other costs that were incurred
  only because the entity entered
  into the contract – e.g.
  subcontractor costs


When fulfillment costs are directly in the scope of other guidance (for example,
Topic 330 on inventory), entities’ determination of cost should be consistent
with the requirements for those goods or services. For example, if an entity
manufactures a server but does not sell the server on a stand-alone basis, we
would expect entities to consider only inventoriable costs when developing its
measure of costs plus margin to estimate stand-alone selling price. However,
research and development costs in the scope of other guidance would typically
be excluded from the estimate of costs to fulfill a performance obligation as
they are not related to fulfillment of a contract.
See Question E170 for further details on the margin used in the expected cost
plus a margin approach.



                  Question E170
                  How does an entity determine what margin to use
                  when developing a cost plus margin data point to
                  estimate a stand-alone selling price?
Interpretive response: Determining the margin to use when developing an
expected cost plus margin estimate requires the exercise of significant
judgment, particularly when historical profit data has not been tracked on a
disaggregated product by product grouping basis. It may be necessary for an
entity to gather reasonably available margin data points and make adjustments
for market conditions and entity-specific factors to arrive at the best estimate of
a reasonable profit margin. It may also be necessary to establish separate
margins for different classes of sales transactions based on different
geographical markets, customer classes or other meaningful groups. The profit
margins used should be consistent with the costs used in the estimate (see
Question E160) to reflect the expected margin on those particular costs.
Consideration of the following factors may be appropriate when estimating a
reasonable margin to be reflected in a cost plus margin data point:
— Average profit margins within an entity’s product or service lines can
  provide evidence of the margin it can expect to attain if the product or
  service were sold separately. Adapting this margin to a specific good or
  service within the group could be necessary, particularly if there are specific
  items in the good or service family with characteristics expected to have
  different margins.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         426
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



      —      The nature of the good or service should be considered to determine
             whether it warrants a premium or a discount from the average profit
             margin. For example, some items might be sold in high volumes or
             might not have significant value-added attributes, even though the
             entity considers them to be in the same product group.
— A competitor’s profit margins realized for similar goods or services may
  provide relevant data points.
      —      It may be necessary to consider the competitive position of an entity’s
             goods or services relative to competitors’ goods or services to
             determine a profit margin that the market would be willing to pay. For
             example, best-in-class goods or services or those with enhanced
             functionality or sold by an entity with a dominant market share likely will
             have higher profit margins than a competitor’s margins. Similarly, if a
             competitor has goods or services with enhanced functionality, or
             benefits from being best in class, an entity may not expect to be able to
             attain a similar margin in the same market.
      —      It may be necessary to consider a competitor’s cost structure to
             determine whether its profit margins require adjustment relative to the
             entity’s expected margin.
      —      It may be necessary to consider how long the competitor has sold the
             product compared to the entity’s product. If the entity is developing a
             new product that will compete with a long-standing product offering of
             a competitor, the entity may expect to have lower profit margins as it
             obtains market share.
— Third parties and industry trade groups may publish average profit margin
  data for goods and services in a particular industry. This external pricing
  data may provide a relevant data point when determining a reasonable
  margin for certain goods and services. An entity should consider the effect
  of market conditions and entity-specific factors on an entity’s estimated
  margin when using such external data.
— An entity may have established processes, for example through a pricing
  committee or otherwise, for establishing reasonable margins for certain
  goods and services sold on a stand-alone basis. How margins are
  determined for goods and services similar to those not sold on a stand-
  alone basis may provide a relevant and useful data point for determining a
  reasonable margin.
No one individual data point is likely to be determinative of a margin that should
be used in a cost plus margin assessment, and the weight given to each data
point in determining an entity’s best estimate will vary depending on facts and
circumstances. However, any estimate will need to maximize the use of
observable inputs.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         427
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E180
                  How should an entity determine the stand-alone
                  selling price for implied updates, upgrades and
                  enhancements during an installation period?
Interpretive response: In some arrangements, the customer installs a
software package (this may be done by a third party, the customer or the
software entity) for an undefined period of time and the contractual PCS term
commences when installation is complete. The software entity may not provide
technical support services to the customer before when installation is
completed (which is typically when a contractual PCS term will commence), but
it may have a history of providing updates, upgrades, and enhancements that
are released during the installation period (implied updates upgrades and
enhancements).
The implied updates, upgrades and enhancements would be a promised service
in the contract (see Question C190) and, consistent with Question C170, would
typically be distinct from the software license. The implied updates, upgrades,
and enhancements may have a different measure of progress (e.g. the entity
might use a measure based on percent complete of the installation) from the
updates, upgrades and enhancements during the contractual PCS term (which
would be a measure of progress that does not correspond to progress toward
implementation), in which case the implied updates, upgrades, and
enhancements and contractual period updates, upgrades and enhancements
would not be a single performance obligation that is comprised of a series of
distinct services. As such, the entity would need to allocate the transaction
price to three performance obligations: (1) the software license, (2) implied
updates, upgrades and enhancements and (3) contractual PCS (assume the
entity accounts for the component services of PCS as a single performance
obligation consistent with Question C150).
An entity would determine the stand-alone selling price for implied updates,
upgrades and enhancements in a manner similar to other goods or services.
The entity would first consider whether it has observable stand-alone selling
prices for updates, upgrades and enhancements sold separately for an
undefined period of time. Oftentimes an entity may have observable stand-
alone selling prices for a typical PCS arrangement (i.e. technical support and
updates, upgrades and enhancements) but does not sell when-and-if-available
updates, upgrades and enhancements separately and, even when it does, those
sales would typically be for a defined period of time (e.g. one year). As a result,
the entity would need to estimate the stand-alone selling price of the implied
updates, upgrades and enhancements.
When developing the estimate for implied updates, upgrades and
enhancements, the entity would need to consider the pricing for typical PCS
because it is an observable data point. For example, one approach would be to
start with observable prices for the typical PCS and make adjustments for
differences in fulfillment costs or other market factors, as well as the fact that
no technical support is being provided during this period. It also would need to
consider the uncertainty as to the time period in its estimate of the pricing for
the implied updates, upgrades and enhancements. However, other approaches
may be acceptable if they maximize the use of observable inputs.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         428
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, the entity would typically use the VSOE of fair value for
a typical PCS arrangement (which includes both technical support services and
rights to unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements) to allocate the
arrangement consideration to implied updates, upgrades and enhancements
and license. If the entity does not sell upgrades and enhancements only as a
separate service, it would not be appropriate for an entity to allocate an amount
less than the full VSOE of fair value of a typical PCS arrangement to the
implied PCS.
Under Topic 606, the entity will be able to estimate the stand-alone selling price
of only updates, upgrades and enhancements rather than using stand-alone
selling price for a typical PCS arrangement. As such, the amount allocated to
the implied updates, upgrades and enhancements under Topic 606 may be less
than what would have been allocated under legacy US GAAP.



                  Question E190
                  How should a software entity determine the stand-
                  alone selling price for PCS when software is
                  deployed over time and the contract contains a
                  stated renewal rate for post-deployment
                  period PCS?
Interpretive response: A software entity may enter into arrangements in which
the software product will be deployed in stages and the entity will provide PCS
over the deployment period. During the deployment period software copies are
installed and the number in use increases over the deployment period until the
software is fully deployed. The initial contract will often include a stated renewal
rate to purchase PCS once the software is fully deployed. Oftentimes, the
entity only has observable stand-alone selling prices for fully deployed PCS
because it does not sell deployment period PCS on a stand-alone basis. These
arrangements generally will have two performance obligations consisting of
(1) the software license and (2) deployment period PCS (assume the entity
accounts for the component services of PCS as a single performance obligation
consistent with Question C150).
Because the entity typically does not sell deployment period PCS separately, it
will need to determine whether stand-alone sales of post-deployment period
PCS would be representative of the stand-alone selling price for deployment
period PCS. The stated renewal rate in the contract for post-deployment period
PCS, even if an observable stand-alone selling price, should not be presumed to
be the stand-alone selling price for deployment period PCS.
To determine whether post-deployment period PCS would provide
representative stand-alone selling price for deployment period PCS, a software
entity should first consider if the services provided are substantially the same.
For example, the entity would consider whether the customer will receive the
same level of technical support (e.g. only from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. or 24 hours a



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         429
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



day, 7 days a week) and the same updates, upgrades, and enhancements in the
deployment period and post-deployment period.
If the PCS provided during the deployment period is substantially the same as
post-deployment PCS, then the entity should evaluate the renewals of fully
deployed PCS when the user base is commensurate with the expected user
base during the deployment period. For example, a narrow range of PCS
renewals on a fully deployed user base that is similar in size to the average user
base expected during the deployment period may be representative of stand-
alone selling price during the deployment period.
When observable stand-alone selling prices are not available (e.g. the fully
deployed PCS is not substantially the same as the deployment period PCS or
the user base is not commensurate), the entity would estimate the stand-alone
selling price by other means. That estimate could start with the stand-alone
selling price of fully deployed PCS, and then adjust for differences in
deployment period efforts as compared to fully deployed PCS efforts.
Alternatively, the entity could make adjustments to deployment period pricing
based on an estimated pro rata difference between a fully deployed user base
and expected deployment period user base. No matter the method used, the
entity should maximize the use of observable inputs, including the pricing of
fully deployed PCS in its estimate.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance (paragraphs 985-605-
55-53 through 55-55) addressed whether a predetermined renewal rate after
the software is fully deployed should be considered VSOE of fair value for PCS
during the deployment period.
That guidance stated that a renewal rate after the software was fully deployed
should be used to establish VSOE of fair value for PCS because that is the only
arrangement under which the PCS is sold separately.
The ability under Topic 606 to estimate a stand-alone selling price for
deployment period PCS where observable selling prices do not exist constitutes
a significant change from legacy US GAAP. Where the absence of VSOE under
legacy US GAAP prevented the software entity from separating the software
license from the PCS, the absence of observable selling prices under Topic 606
will not affect the assessment of whether the software license and the
deployment period PCS are separate performance obligations, which they
typically will be (see Questions C160 and C170).
In addition, if the stand-alone selling price of fully deployed PCS does not
represent the stand-alone selling price of deployment period PCS, the entity could
use an amount different from (and likely smaller than) the price of fully deployed
PCS. This could result in an amount allocated to deployment period PCS under
Topic 606 that is less than VSOE of fully deployed PCS. As such, the amount of
consideration allocated to deployment period PCS may be less under Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         430
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Example E190.1
                  Deployment period PCS
Description of the Arrangement
ABC Corp. enters into an arrangement with Customer to transfer a perpetual
license to Product A and to provide technical support and unspecified updates,
upgrades and enhancements (collectively, PCS). The Customer will deploy
Product A in stages over three years (i.e. ABC will ramp up to its 10,000
permitted seats over the first three years of the license period), with initial
deployment of some seats commencing upon transfer of the license (i.e. the
deployment period begins when the initial license is transferred). The pace of
deployment is in the sole control of Customer, and control of the license
transfers upon delivery of the Product A software as Customer has the ability to
use and benefit from the software at that point.
The contractual term of PCS commences six months after initial license transfer
(i.e. contractual PCS is for a term of 2.5 years). After three years, PCS may be
renewed annually for an amount equal to 20% of the $1,000,000 stated
contract price for the Product A license. Even though the contractual PCS does
not commence for six months, ABC has a customary business practice of
providing PCS during the first six months of the deployment period. The total
contract price is $1,300,000.
ABC concludes that the contract has two performance obligations: (1) the
software license and (2) three years of deployment period PCS. ABC considered
whether the six months of implied deployment period PCS and 2.5 years of
contractual deployment period PCS were separate performance obligations.
ABC concluded that the implied deployment period PCS and contractual
deployment period PCS would be a series of distinct services that form a part of
a single performance obligation in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-14(b)
because the nature of the promise is the same throughout the three-year period
(all deployment period PCS) and both services would have the same pattern
of transfer.
ABC only sells PCS separately through renewals on a fully deployed basis. The
Product A license is never sold without bundled PCS and the selling price of the
license is uncertain.
ABC consistently sells post-deployment renewal PCS at 20% of the stated
license fee for a similar class of customers and, consistent with Question E130
and Example E130.1, concludes that the stand-alone selling price for post-
deployment PCS to be $200,000 per year.
ABC does not sell deployment period PCS separately; however, ABC evaluates
whether the stand-alone selling price of deployment period PCS would be
commensurate with the stand-alone selling price of post-deployment PCS. At
contract inception, ABC expects the average deployment period user base
(based on the estimated timing of the customer reaching full deployment) to be
approximately one-half of the fully deployed user base.
While the services are substantially the same (e.g. both provide 9 to 5 technical
support and the same when-and-if-available upgrades) for deployment period
and post-deployment period PCS, ABC observes that it would not normally sell




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         431
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



PCS to a customer with a similar deployment level for $200,000. Therefore,
ABC does not use the same stand-alone selling price for the deployment period
because it would not depict what the entity would expect for providing services
to similarly sized customers.
ABC has other Product A customers currently in PCS renewal terms with a fully
deployed user base that is commensurate with the average deployment period
user base that ABC expects for Customer. In those contracts, the renewal rate
was 25% of the stated license fee; however, as the user base was smaller, the
stated fee was typically lower than the contract price with Customer. ABC
observed the 25% was applied consistently and established an observable
stand-alone selling price for that class of customer based on a percentage of
the license fee. ABC also observed that the fixed dollar prices ranged from
$65,000 to $190,000.
ABC estimates the stand-alone selling price for deployment period PCS using
the adjusted market assessment approach based on the observable inputs that
are the stand-alone sales of fully deployed PCS to customers with a fully
deployed user base. ABC concludes that it would sell annual deployment period
PCS to Customer for $125,000. This estimate is based on the renewal rate of
25% (i.e. consistent with the rate for a similar user base) and an estimate of an
average user base that is 50% smaller during the deployment period
($1,000,000 × 25% × 50%). ABC also notes this price is in the range of
observable PCS renewals for a fully deployed user base commensurate with
Customer’s deployment levels. As such, the stand-alone selling price for the
three-year deployment PCS is $375,000 ($125,000 × 3).
ABC next estimates the stand-alone selling price for the license and notes that
a residual approach cannot be strictly used because ABC does not have an
observable stand-alone selling price for PCS. However, in order to maximize the
use of observable inputs, ABC uses observable prices of PCS as there are no
observable data points on which to base the estimate of the license. That is,
inputs based on cost are not relevant and there is no observable market data for
separate sales of the license.
ABC concludes that the stand-alone selling price of the license is the difference
between the stand-alone price of PCS and the stated contract amount because
the stand-alone selling price of PCS is derived from observable stand-alone
sales of fully deployed PCS.
ABC allocates $375,000 to the deployment period PCS and $925,000
($1,300,000 – $375,000) to the license.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         432
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E200
                  How should a software entity determine the stand-
                  alone selling price of PCS provided during a period
                  of unlimited deployment when the contract
                  includes stated renewals of PCS during the
                  deployment period and different prices in the post-
                  deployment period?
Interpretive response: A software entity may enter into arrangements for the
sale of perpetual licenses with unlimited deployment (a.k.a. ‘all you can eat
arrangements’) for a stated period of time (e.g. three years) bundled with an
initial PCS period that is shorter than the deployment period. The
arrangements typically consist of an initial fee with stated amounts
representing the perpetual license together with one year of PCS. During the
deployment period, the arrangements frequently will contain an option to
renew PCS annually for an amount stated in the arrangement. At the end of
the deployment period (the three-year period), the PCS renewal fee is
determined based on the ultimate number of copies deployed by the end
user. That is, there is different pricing for PCS renewals during and after the
three-year deployment period.
In the situations described in the previous paragraph, a software entity should
determine the stand-alone selling price for the deployment period PCS similar to
other PCS arrangements. The stated renewal rate during the deployment period
or in the post-deployment period should not be presumed to be the stand-alone
selling price. However, if the entity has a history of deployment period PCS
being renewed by other customers at similar prices for similar levels of
deployment, those renewals may provide evidence of the stand-alone selling
price for deployment period PCS.
If observable prices of deployment period PCS are not available, consistent with
Question E190, the entity would evaluate whether stand-alone sales of fully
deployed PCS provide relevant observable sales prices as well as all other
relevant data when estimating the stand-alone selling price for the deployment
period PCS. See Question E190 for further discussion.



                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy software revenue recognition (paragraphs 985-605-55-70 through
55-73) if entities concluded that they could not establish VSOE for the unlimited
deployment period PCS due to different pricing methodologies during the
deployment period and post-deployment period, the entity would recognize the
entire arrangement fee ratably over the applicable deployment period.
Where the absence of VSOE under legacy US GAAP prevented the software
entity from separating the software license from the PCS, under Topic 606 this
will not affect the assessment of whether the software license and the
unlimited deployment period PCS are separate performance obligations. This
requirement constitutes a significant change from legacy US GAAP.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         433
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




Allocate the transaction price

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Allocation Based on Standalone Selling Prices
32-31 To allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a
relative standalone selling price basis, an entity shall determine the
standalone selling price at contract inception of the distinct good or service
underlying each performance obligation in the contract and allocate the
transaction price in proportion to those standalone selling prices.


At contract inception, the transaction price is generally allocated to each
performance obligation on the basis of relative stand-alone selling prices. In
most cases, an allocation based on stand-alone selling prices faithfully depicts
the amount of consideration to which an entity is entitled for satisfying a
performance obligation and the relative stand-alone selling price allocation
should be the general method for allocating the transaction price. However,
there are situations when a relative allocation may not faithfully depict the
amount of consideration to which the entity is entitled.
Topic 606 includes exceptions to the relative stand-alone selling price approach
for the following scenarios:
— Observable evidence that a discount relates entirely to one or more, but not
  all, performance obligations.
— Variable consideration is attributable to one or more, but not all, distinct
  goods or services.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, the allocation of arrangement consideration to
delivered items was limited to amounts of revenue that are not contingent on
an entity’s future performance. Topic 606 does not have such a limitation,
therefore the full estimated transaction price – which includes all amounts,
including contingent amounts, to which the entity expects to be entitled – is
estimated and allocated on a relative stand-alone selling price basis to each
performance obligation without limitation.
However, the estimate of variable consideration may be constrained (see
Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price). Nevertheless, Topic 606’s
removal of the contingent cap may accelerate the recognition of contingent or
variable consideration in comparison to legacy US GAAP.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         434
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E210
                  Can the sum of the stand-alone selling prices in a
                  contract be less than the total transaction price?
Interpretive response: Generally, no. We generally expect that the sum of the
stand-alone selling prices of the individual goods and/or services will be equal to
or greater than the bundled contract fee. Customers typically are not willing to
pay a premium for a bundle of goods or services when they could purchase the
goods or services for less on a stand-alone basis.
In situations when the sum of the stand-alone selling prices is less than the
total transaction price, entities should reconsider whether they have identified
all of the items that Topic 606 requires to be identified in the contract (e.g.
promised goods and services, significant financing components) and whether
the stand-alone prices have been properly determined. In particular, entities
should evaluate whether the premium is in substance a nonrefundable upfront
fee that provides the customer with a material right to purchase additional
goods or services or renew the existing contract.
If a premium remains after reconsideration of the points above, the premium
generally should be allocated on a relative stand-alone selling price basis with
the rest of the transaction price unless there is observable evidence that the
premium relates to one or more, but not all, performance obligations. For
example, an entity might also consider the guidance on allocating a discount to
one or more performance obligations to determine whether there is observable
evidence that a premium entirely relates to a bundle of distinct goods or
services but not all of the performance obligations in the contract.



                  Question E220
                  How are nonrefundable upfront fees treated when
                  allocating the contract’s estimated transaction price
                  to the separate performance obligations?
Interpretive response: Nonrefundable upfront fees are considered part of the
transaction price. The total transaction price, including any nonrefundable
upfront fees, is allocated to the performance obligations in the contract using
the relative stand-alone selling price method.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         435
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




Allocating a discount

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Allocation of a Discount
32-36 A customer receives a discount for purchasing a bundle of goods or
services if the sum of the standalone selling prices of those promised goods
or services in the contract exceeds the promised consideration in a contract.
Except when an entity has observable evidence in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-32-37 that the entire discount relates to only one or more,
but not all, performance obligations in a contract, the entity shall allocate a
discount proportionately to all performance obligations in the contract. The
proportionate allocation of the discount in those circumstances is a
consequence of the entity allocating the transaction price to each
performance obligation on the basis of the relative standalone selling prices of
the underlying distinct goods or services.
32-37 An entity shall allocate a discount entirely to one or more, but not all,
performance obligations in the contract if all of the following criteria are met:
a. The entity regularly sells each distinct good or service (or each bundle of
   distinct goods or services) in the contract on a standalone basis.
b. The entity also regularly sells on a standalone basis a bundle (or bundles) of
   some of those distinct goods or services at a discount to the standalone
   selling prices of the goods or services in each bundle.
c. The discount attributable to each bundle of goods or services described in
   (b) is substantially the same as the discount in the contract, and an analysis
   of the goods or services in each bundle provides observable evidence of
   the performance obligation (or performance obligations) to which the entire
   discount in the contract belongs.
32-38 If a discount is allocated entirely to one or more performance obligations
in the contract in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-37, an entity shall
allocate the discount before using the residual approach to estimate the
standalone selling price of a good or service in accordance with paragraph 606-
10-32-34(c).


The first exception to relative stand-alone selling price allocation relates to
discounts attributable entirely to one or more, but not all, performance
obligations. In some cases, a proportional allocation of a discount may not
depict the amount of consideration to which an entity is entitled for satisfying a
particular performance obligation. For example, in a bundled arrangement
consisting of high margin and low margin products, a relative allocation of a
discount could result in a loss on one part of a contract although the contract as
a whole is profitable. [ASU 2014-09.BC277]
In order to apply the exception, an entity needs to have observable evidence
that the discount relates to only one or more, but not all, performance
obligations in a contract. A discount is only allocated entirely to one or more, but
not all, of the performance obligations, if the following criteria are met:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         436
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



— the entity regularly sells each distinct good or service, or each bundle of
  distinct goods or services, in the contract on a stand-alone basis;
— the entity also regularly sells, on a stand-alone basis, a bundle (or bundles)
  of some of those distinct goods or services at a discount to the stand-alone
  selling prices of the goods or services in each bundle; and
— the discount attributable to each bundle of goods or services is substantially
  the same as the discount in the contract, and an analysis of the goods or
  services in each bundle provides observable evidence of the performance
  obligation(s) to which the entire discount in the contract belongs.
The guidance on allocating a discount will typically apply to contracts with at
least three performance obligations. That is because the discount for the good
or service (or bundle of goods or services) has to be substantially the same as
the discount in the contract. As a result, an entity may be able to demonstrate
that the discount relates to two or more performance obligations, but it will be
difficult to have sufficient evidence to allocate the discount entirely to a single
performance obligation.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Generally, under legacy US GAAP, an entity cannot attribute a discount in a
contract to one or more separate deliverables, other than when the residual
method is used in software arrangements and the entire discount is attributed
to the delivered items.
However, the allocation of a discount under Topic 606 is not restricted to
particular industries or circumstances – so if the criteria are met, a discount is
allocated entirely to one or more performance obligations in a contract,
regardless of whether they are delivered or undelivered items.



                  Question E230
                  Is an entity required to evaluate whether a discount
                  should be entirely allocated to one or more, but not
                  all, performance obligations in all contracts?
Interpretive response: Yes. The guidance on allocating a discount is not
optional. However, practically, this analysis is required only if the entity
regularly sells each distinct good or service – or distinct bundle of goods or
services – on a stand-alone basis. Therefore, if the entity regularly sells only
some of the distinct goods or services in the contract on a stand-alone basis,
then the criteria for allocating the discount entirely to one or more, but not all,
of the performance obligations are not met and further analysis is generally
not required (see Question E240).
Some arrangements involve several different goods or services that may be
sold in various bundles. In this case, an entity may need to consider numerous




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                              437
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



possible combinations of products to determine whether the entire discount in
the contract can be allocated to a particular bundle.
Topic 606 does not provide specific guidance on how to evaluate whether a
good or service or bundle of goods or services is regularly sold on a stand-alone
basis. Entities should have a policy to define ‘regularly sells’ for different
bundles of goods or services. This may include considering both volume and
frequency.



                  Example E230.1
                  Allocating a discount
Company B enters into a contract to license Software Products X, Y and Z for a
total amount of $100. Company B regularly sells the licenses individually for the
following prices.

 Product                                                                                                                 Price
 X                                                                                                                        $ 40
 Y                                                                                                                              55
 Z                                                                                                                              45
 Total                                                                                                                    $140

Company B also regularly licenses Software Products Y and Z together for $60.
The contract includes a discount of $40 on the overall transaction ($140 – $100),
which would be allocated proportionately to all three products in the contract
when applying the relative stand-alone selling price method. However, because
Company B regularly sells Products Y and Z as a bundle for $60 and Product X
for $40, it has evidence that the entire discount should be allocated to the
licenses to Products Y and Z.
The licenses to Products Y and Z are transferred at different points in time, and
therefore, the allocated amount of $60 is individually allocated to the Product Y
and Z licenses by reference to their relative stand-alone selling prices as follows.

                                 Stand-alone               Selling price
 Product                         selling price                     ratio               Allocation              Calculation
 Y                                           $ 55                       55%                      $33           ($60 × 55%)
 Z                                              45                      45%                        27          ($60 × 45%)
 Total                                       $100                      100%                      $60




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         438
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E240
                  Can an entity allocate a discount entirely to one or
                  more performance obligations when the stand-
                  alone selling price of one or more of the
                  performance obligations is highly variable or
                  uncertain?
Interpretive response: It depends. When an entity uses the residual approach
to estimate the stand-alone selling price of a good or service, an entity first
evaluates whether it should allocate an observable discount (i.e. a discount on a
bundle of goods or services) to one or more goods or services in the contract.
In making this evaluation, the entity would need to consider whether the
resulting allocation is consistent with the overall allocation objective in
paragraph 606-10-32-28.
A literal reading of the guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-37 may suggest that an
entity would rarely, if ever, allocate a discount to one or more, but not all,
performance obligations in the contract when there is a performance obligation
in the contract that has a highly variable or uncertain stand-alone selling price.
This is because the guidance requires that the entity regularly sell each distinct
good or service (or each bundle of distinct goods or services) in the contract on
a stand-alone basis and that the entity can quantify the total discount in the
contract. Performance obligations with a highly variable or uncertain stand-alone
selling price often are not sold on a stand-alone basis, and because the stand-
alone selling price is highly variable or uncertain, it may not be possible to
quantify the total discount in the contract.
However, paragraph 606-10-32-38 states that if a discount is allocated entirely to
one or more performance obligations in the contract, an entity should allocate the
discount before using the residual approach to estimate the stand-alone selling
price of a performance obligation. This raises a potential conflict in the guidance
because it appears that an entity would not be able to apply the allocation
guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-37 when the stand-alone selling price of one or
more of the performance obligations in the contract is highly variable or uncertain.
As such, it is unclear when paragraph 606-10-32-38 would apply.
Example 34 (reproduced below) illustrates scenarios where the residual
approach can or cannot be applied to a performance obligation in the contract
when there is a directly observable discount on a bundle of goods in a contract.
In Case B (paragraphs 606-10-55-265 through 55-268), before using the residual
approach, the entity allocated a discount directly to a bundle of goods or
services even though the discount in the entire contract was not objectively
determinable due to the highly variable or uncertain nature of one of the
performance obligations.
We believe, based on discussions at public Board meetings and from informal
discussions with the FASB staff, the Examples indicate that before using a
residual approach, an entity should evaluate whether it is appropriate to allocate
a discount based on observable evidence. In Case B, the entity had evidence
that allocating the discount entirely to a bundle was appropriate because the
amount allocated to the performance obligation estimated under the residual
approach was in the range of the stand-alone selling prices using the residual




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         439
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



approach in other contracts. In contrast, Case C illustrated that the discount in
the contract should be allocated under the general allocation guidance if
allocating a discount entirely to other performance obligations results in an
allocation that is inconsistent with the allocation objective.
The approach described above ensures that the discount in the contract is not
allocated entirely to that residual good or service. Even if it appears that all of
the requirements in paragraph 606-10-32-37 are not met, observable prices of a
bundle of goods or services in a contract provide better evidence on which to
allocate a discount than the residual approach does. In other words, an
estimated stand-alone selling price for the good or service determined by the
residual approach may more appropriately depict the price the entity would
expect to be entitled to for transferring that good or service after taking into
account observable prices for the other performance obligations in the contract.
In any case, the entity will need to have observable evidence that supports the
allocation of the discount to one or more, but not all, performance obligations
that often may be difficult for entities to establish.




                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Allocating the Transaction Price to Performance Obligations
• • > Example 34 Allocating a Discount
• • • > Case B—Residual Approach Is Appropriate
55-265 The entity enters into a contract with a customer to sell Products A, B,
and C as described in Case A. The contract also includes a promise to transfer
Product D. Total consideration in the contract is $130. The standalone selling
price for Product D is highly variable (see paragraph 606-10-32-34(c)(1))
because the entity sells Product D to different customers for a broad range of
amounts ($15 – $45). Consequently, the entity decides to estimate the
standalone selling price of Product D using the residual approach.
55-266 Before estimating the standalone selling price of Product D using the
residual approach, the entity determines whether any discount should be
allocated to the other performance obligations in the contract in accordance
with paragraphs 606-10-32-37 through 32-38.
55-267 As in Case A, because the entity regularly sells Products B and C
together for $60 and Product A for $40, it has observable evidence that $100
should be allocated to those 3 products and a $40 discount should be
allocated to the promises to transfer Products B and C in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-32-37. Using the residual approach, the entity estimates the
standalone selling price of Product D to be $30 as follows:
                        Standalone
Product                Selling Price           Method
Product A                          $ 40        Directly observable (see paragraph 606-10-32-32)
Products B                         $ 60        Directly observable with discount (see paragraph 606-10-
and C                                          32-37)




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         440
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




Product D                          $ 30        Residual approach (see paragraph 606-10-32-34(c))
Total                              $130

55-268 The entity observes that the resulting $30 allocated to Product D is
within the range of its observable selling prices ($15 – $45). Therefore, the
resulting allocation (see above table) is consistent with the allocation objective
in paragraph 606-10-32-28 and the guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-33.
• • • > Case C—Residual Approach Is Inappropriate
55-269 The same facts as in Case B apply to Case C except the transaction
price is $105 instead of $130. Consequently, the application of the residual
approach would result in a standalone selling price of $5 for Product D ($105
transaction price less $100 allocated to Products A, B, and C). The entity
concludes that $5 would not faithfully depict the amount of consideration to
which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for satisfying its
performance obligation to transfer Product D because $5 does not approximate
the standalone selling price of Product D, which ranges from $15 – $45.
Consequently, the entity reviews its observable data, including sales and
margin reports, to estimate the standalone selling price of Product D using
another suitable method. The entity allocates the transaction price of $105 to
Products A, B, C, and D using the relative standalone selling prices of those
products in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-32-28 through 32-35.



Allocating variable consideration

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Allocation of Variable Consideration
32-39 Variable consideration that is promised in a contract may be attributable
to the entire contract or to a specific part of the contract, such as either of the
following:
a. One or more, but not all, performance obligations in the contract (for
   example, a bonus may be contingent on an entity transferring a promised
   good or service within a specified period of time)
b. One or more, but not all, distinct goods or services promised in a series of
   distinct goods or services that forms part of a single performance
   obligation in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-14(b) (for example, the
   consideration promised for the second year of a two-year cleaning service
   contract will increase on the basis of movements in a specified
   inflation index).
32-40 An entity shall allocate a variable amount (and subsequent changes to
that amount) entirely to a performance obligation or to a distinct good or
service that forms part of a single performance obligation in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-14(b) if both of the following criteria are met:
a.     The terms of a variable payment relate specifically to the entity’s efforts to
       satisfy the performance obligation or transfer the distinct good or service




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         441
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



   (or to a specific outcome from satisfying the performance obligation or
   transferring the distinct good or service).
b. Allocating the variable amount of consideration entirely to the performance
   obligation or the distinct good or service is consistent with the allocation
   objective in paragraph 606-10-32-28 when considering all of the
   performance obligations and payment terms in the contract.
32-41 The allocation requirements in paragraphs 606-10-32-28 through 32-38
shall be applied to allocate the remaining amount of the transaction price that
does not meet the criteria in paragraph 606-10-32-40.


The second exception to the relative stand-alone selling price allocation relates
to variable consideration. In some instances, variable consideration does not
relate to all of the performance obligations (or distinct goods or services) in a
contract. For example, a contract with multiple performance obligations may
include a bonus that relates specifically to satisfying one or more, but not all, of
the performance obligations. In those situations, it might not be appropriate to
allocate variable consideration to all of the performance obligations because it
would not depict the amount of the consideration to which the entity was
entitled for a particular performance obligation. [ASU 2014-09.BC278]
Variable consideration may be attributable to:
— all of the performance obligations in a contract;
— one or more, but not all, of the performance obligations in a contract – e.g.
  a bonus that is contingent on transferring a promised good or service within
  a specified time period; or
— one or more, but not all, of the distinct goods or services promised in a
  series of distinct goods or services that form part of a single
  performance obligation.
Paragraph BC285 in ASU No. 2014-09 describes the Boards’ rationale for
allocating variable consideration to portions of a single performance obligation
(i.e. distinct goods or services that comprise a single performance obligation).




                  Excerpt from ASU 2014-09

BC285. The Boards clarified in paragraph 606-10-32-39(b) that variable
consideration can be allocated to distinct goods or services even if those goods
or services form a single performance obligation. The Boards made this
clarification to ensure that an entity can in some cases attribute the
assessment of variable consideration to only the satisfied portion of a
performance obligation when that performance obligation meets the criterion
in paragraph 606-10-25-14(b). Consider the example of a contract to provide
hotel management services for one year (that is, a single performance
obligation in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-14(b)) in which the
consideration is variable and determined based on two percent of occupancy
rates. The entity provides a daily service of management that is distinct, and
the uncertainty related to the consideration also is resolved on a daily basis
when the occupancy occurs. In those circumstances, the Boards did not intend




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         442
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



for an entity to allocate the variable consideration determined on a daily basis
to the entire performance obligation (that is, the promise to provide
management services over a one-year period). Instead, the variable
consideration should be allocated to the distinct service to which the variable
consideration relates, which is the daily management service.


When an entity meets the criteria in paragraph 606-10-32-40, the variable
amount (and subsequent changes to that amount) is allocated entirely to a
performance obligation, or to a distinct good or service that forms part of a
single performance obligation. The guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-40 provides
two criteria that must be met to allocate variable amounts to one or more, but
not all, distinct goods or services.

Variable payment relates specifically to the entity’s efforts to
satisfy the performance obligation
Assessing this criterion may often be relatively straightforward because the
contract terms specifically identify how the variable amounts are resolved and
the transfer of goods or services required to earn that amount. When evaluating
whether a variable amount relates specifically to a distinct service period,
entities should evaluate (a) whether the entity’s efforts or customer usage
occurs within that time period and (b) whether the variability is resolved in that
period. When variable consideration is contingent upon satisfying multiple
distinct goods or services (including multiple distinct service periods) or the
terms of the payment are dependent on the prior or future periods, the variable
amounts typically relate to all of the distinct goods or services required to earn
that consideration.

Allocation is consistent with the allocation objective
The allocation objective in paragraph 606-10-32-28 is to “allocate the transaction
price to each performance obligation (or distinct good or service) in an amount
that depicts the amount of consideration to which the entity expects to be
entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to the
customer”. In order to meet the allocation objective, the entity must consider
all of the performance obligations and payment terms in the contract and not
just the distinct goods or services to which the variable consideration relates. In
other words, the entity considers whether the allocation objective is met for the
entire contract.
See Questions E270 through E330 for further information on meeting the
criteria to allocate variable consideration to one or more, but not all, distinct
goods or services.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         443
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E250
                  Is the guidance on allocating variable consideration
                  optional?

Interpretive response: No. Entities must evaluate whether variable
consideration in its contracts meets the requirements to allocate the amounts
entirely to one or more, but not all, distinct goods or services in the contract.
As a result, whether SaaS or other professional services are a series of distinct
services will be an important evaluation when the contract includes variable
consideration because an entity might be required to allocate variable
consideration entirely to one or more distinct goods or services (or distinct
service periods) within the performance obligation. See Chapter C – Step 2:
Identify the performance obligations in the contract, which discusses identifying
when SaaS is considered a performance obligation consisting of a series of
distinct goods or services.



                  Question E260
                  Which is applied first – the variable consideration
                  allocation guidance or the guidance on allocating
                  discounts?
Interpretive response: The variable consideration allocation guidance is applied
before the guidance on allocating discounts in paragraphs 606-10-32-36 through
32-38 or the general allocation guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-28 through 32-
35. In some cases, a contract may contain both variable consideration and a
discount. For example, an entity may sell products in a bundle at a discount to
the aggregate stand-alone selling prices of the products in the bundle. In
addition, the transaction price may include a variable element.
In these cases, an entity applies the guidance on allocating variable
consideration before it applies the guidance on allocating discounts. That is,
Topic 606 includes an allocation hierarchy. When a contract contains both
variable consideration and a discount, applying the respective allocation
guidance in the reverse order may result in an incorrect allocation of the
transaction price. [606-10-32-41; TRG Agenda Paper No. 31]
Some contracts contain features that may be variable consideration and/or a
discount – e.g. a refund resulting from a service level guarantee. In these cases,
an entity evaluates the nature of the feature. If the service level guarantee
causes the transaction price to be variable – e.g. exceeding a guaranteed
percentage of down-time during a period results in a refund (see Question D170
for details on SLAs) – then the entity follows the hierarchy and applies the
guidance on allocating variable consideration first. Conversely, if a rebate is
fixed and not contingent – e.g. the refund is simply a fixed discount against the
aggregate stand-alone selling prices of the items in a bundle – then an entity
applies the guidance on allocating discounts or the general allocation guidance
and does not consider the guidance on allocating variable consideration.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         444
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question E265
                   What factors identify whether a variable payment
                   relates specifically to the entity’s efforts to transfer
                   a distinct good or service?
Interpretive response: The first criterion to allocate variable consideration to
one or more, but not all, distinct goods or services states, “The terms of a
variable payment relate specifically to the entity’s efforts to satisfy the
performance obligation or transfer the distinct good or service (or to a specific
outcome from satisfying the performance obligation or transferring the distinct
good or service).” [606-10-32-40(a)]
This criterion is generally met when the variability is solely attributed to and
resolved as a result of the transfer of one or more but not all goods or services.
This is the case when the amount paid by the customer is independent of the
transfer of past or future goods or services (including efforts in previous
periods). In other words, the amount paid is resolved entirely as a result of
transferring one or more but not all goods or services.
In contrast, this criterion is not met when:
— the variable amount could change based on the transfer of future goods or
  services. This would mean the variable amounts are attributable to both the
  current and future goods or services; and
— the variable amount depends on distinct goods or services previously
  transferred. This would mean that the variable amounts are attributable to
  not only the final good or service but all of the goods or services transferred
  before it.
The following are examples of when this criterion is met.
— Out-of-pocket reimbursements. Reimbursements of variable amounts
  related to distinct implementation or installation services but not the
  subsequent good or service – e.g. SaaS.
— Performance bonuses. A performance bonus associated entirely with
  successfully completing a specified performance obligation.
— Market-based pricing. A contract to transfer a distinct good where the
  price charged is based on the prevailing market rate at the time.
— Transaction- or user-based fees. Transaction- or user-based fees that are
  resolved and linked entirely to the distinct good transferred or performance
  within a service period, as long as the price per transaction or user does
  not change as a result of transferring future goods or services. See
  Question E280 for further details on the transaction-based pricing related to
  a series of distinct services.
If this criterion is met, the entity also evaluates whether the other criterion (i.e.
meeting the allocation objective) is met to allocate the variable amounts entirely
to that distinct good or service.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         445
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E270
                  In order to allocate variable consideration entirely
                  to a distinct good or service within a single
                  performance obligation, must the allocation result
                  in the same amount (absolute value) being
                  allocated to each distinct good or service within
                  the series?
Interpretive response: No. At the July 2015 TRG Meeting, the TRG discussed
the allocation of variable consideration to a series of distinct services in a long-
term service contract. The TRG agreed that the allocation of variable
consideration to a distinct service period within a single performance obligation
would not need to result in the same amount (absolute value) being allocated to
each service period within the performance obligation. For example, an annual
contract to perform services may consist of daily distinct service periods and
the allocation is not required to result in each day having the same amount of
variable consideration allocated to each day.
TRG members agreed that Topic 606 does not require a relative stand-alone
selling price allocation of the variable consideration because the guidance on
allocating variable consideration is an exception to the general rule. While not
required, an entity could use stand-alone selling prices to support the
reasonableness of the allocation. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 39]
The TRG agreed that judgment will be required to determine when the criteria
in paragraph 606-10-32-40 have been met. In particular, determining when the
allocation objective in paragraph 606-10-32-28 has been met could be
challenging given that Topic 606 does not prescribe how to make that
determination.
At the meeting, the TRG discussed several circumstances where the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-32-40 would be met in a long-term service contract with a
single performance obligation that is composed of a series of distinct daily
services. The fact patterns discussed at TRG meetings represent simplified
transaction structures, and entities need to carefully evaluate their own facts
and circumstances before concluding that the criteria to allocate variable
consideration have been met. In some cases, this would involve a careful
evaluation of whether the fees are variable or a result of the customer making
optional purchases (see Questions C385 and C400). The rest of this discussion
assumes any variability based on quantity relates to variable consideration
rather than an optional purchase.
Based on that discussion, the following factors may be helpful in evaluating
whether variable amounts can be allocated to a distinct good or service period
and in particular whether the allocation objective (criterion 606-10-32-40(b)) has
been met (not exhaustive):
— Consistency in prices per unit. When the variable pricing is based on a per
  unit amount or formula and that pricing is consistent throughout the
  contract, the consistency in pricing may indicate that the variable pricing
  depicts the amount of consideration the entity would expect to be entitled
  to for providing services (e.g. SaaS) each distinct service period. See




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         446
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



      Question E280 for further information on a contract with a consistent price
      per transaction. This factor is most relevant in evaluating an allocation
      between distinct services that comprise a single performance obligation
      because when each distinct service period is substantially the same we
      would expect the entity to price each period in a similar manner unless the
      entity can support the reasons for changing prices. However, this factor
      may not be relevant when evaluating an allocation between two
      performance obligations.
— Price per unit is commensurate with the price charged separately.
  When the entity (or other entities) charges a commensurate price per
  transaction, per user or other formula on a stand-alone basis it might
  indicate that the price charged depicts the amount the entity would expect
  to receive for transferring a distinct service. For example, when a SaaS
  entity typically charges a similar price per user per month to a customer
  class, it might indicate that the pricing for each distinct period is consistent
  with the allocation objective. This factor would be particularly relevant when
  evaluating the allocation of variable fees in contracts with multiple
  performance obligations. For example, in a contract to provide two distinct
  SaaS applications with transaction-based pricing, the allocation objective
  would not be met when contractual price charged for one service includes
  amounts attributable to the other service.
— Consideration is commensurate with the value or benefit to the
  customer. A variable fee that reflects the value or benefit transferred to the
  customer during a distinct service period may indicate that the allocation
  objective is met. For example, a fee based on usage that is resolved each
  day may reflect the value to the customer in that period because the
  customer used the service more frequently in that period. Similarly, each
  annual performance bonus in a multi-year contract may reflect the
  performance of the entity and value delivered to the customer in that
  annual period. In the case of an annual bonus, the bonus would be allocated
  entirely to the annual period and recognized over that time period based on
  the measure of progress for the performance obligation.
— Consideration is commensurate with the entity’s efforts to fulfill the
  service. A variable fee that reflects the entity’s efforts to fulfill the service
  may indicate that the allocation objective is met. For example, the TRG
  discussed a contract for hotel management services and noted that
  reimbursement of variable fulfillment costs in each distinct period would be
  consistent with the allocation objective. That is because the entity typically
  would expect to be entitled to a different amount for each distinct service
  period based on the costs incurred during that time period.
— Pricing is consistent with the entity’s customary pricing practices.
  Similar to how an entity would establish stand-alone selling price for a good
  or service, an entity should evaluate its customary pricing practices to
  evaluate whether the variable amount depicts the amount the entity would
  expect to be entitled to for transferring the goods or services. Entities
  should evaluate all reasonably available data points, market conditions,
  entity-specific factors and information about the class of customer.
— Changing prices. Additional considerations are required when the variable
  prices change over the contract period even if those changes are consistent




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         447
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



      with the entity’s customer pricing practices. The price may change based
      on prior usage such as volume rebates based or simply based on the
      passage of time. See Question E290 for considerations with tiered price
      and Question E300 for prices that change over time.
The TRG did not discuss all fact patterns where the variable consideration
allocation guidance would be applied. For example, the TRG only discussed
performance obligations that were a series of distinct service periods while
other performance obligations could be a series of distinct quantities. Similarly,
the TRG did not specifically discuss allocating variable consideration between
multiple performance obligations. As such, in those scenarios an entity would
consider the following.
— When a single performance obligation consists of a series of distinct
  quantities, the entity would evaluate the criteria in paragraph 606-10-32-40
  to determine if it could allocate variable fees to each quantity rather than a
  time period. For example, in a performance obligation that consists of a
  promise to process 25 transactions rather than a series of distinct time
  periods, the entity would evaluate whether it could allocate any variable
  amounts to each transaction instead of a time period.
— When a contract contains multiple performance obligations, the entity
  needs to evaluate whether a reasonable amount of consideration is
  allocated to all of the performance obligations when considering all of the
  payment terms. As such, in order for variable consideration to meet the
  allocation objective, the entity must evaluate the effects of the allocation on
  all of the performance obligations. The resulting allocation should
  reasonably depict what the entity would expect to be entitled to for
  transferring the goods or services. See Questions E300 and E310 for
  additional considerations with multiple performance obligations.
Questions E280 through E330 and related examples provide further discussion
of the concepts above.



                  Question E280
                  When an entity charges a consistent per transaction
                  or per usage fee in a SaaS contract with a single
                  performance obligation can the variable fees be
                  allocated entirely to the period in which they are
                  earned?
Interpretive response: Generally, yes. As discussed in Question D210, when a
SaaS performance obligation is comprised of a series of distinct service periods
(e.g. a series of distinct daily, monthly or annual periods of service) – which will
generally be the case (see the Overview section of Chapter C – Step 2: Identify
the performance obligations in the contract) – allocating the transaction-based
fees to the distinct service period in which the fee is earned is appropriate when
both criteria to allocate variable consideration in paragraph 606-10-32-40 are met.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         448
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a)
In general, an entity will conclude that a fee that is (1) linked to the volume of
transactions processed by, or usage of, the hosted software by the customer
during a distinct service period and (2) resolved as to its ultimate amount within
a distinct service period (e.g. the fee is not subject to rebate or credit in a
subsequent period) specifically relates to that distinct service period (i.e. the
criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a) will be met).
For example, if a contract for SaaS sets out a fee per transaction or usage of the
hosted application (e.g. $1 per transaction processed) that is not subject to
retroactive adjustment (e.g. a rebate of a portion of the per transaction fees
already paid by the customer if a cumulative transaction volume is passed), the
criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a) will be met for each day of service
provided because the fees relate specifically to the customer’s usage during
that distinct service period. In contrast, if the $1 per transaction fee can be
retroactively adjusted to $0.90 or $0.80 per transaction based on transaction
volumes that will occur throughout the year, the criterion in paragraph 606-10-
32-40(a) would be met for each distinct year of the SaaS performance
obligation, rather than each day. See Question E290 for further discussion on
volume discounts and rebates
Criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(b)
When per transaction or per usage pricing is consistent throughout the contract
term, the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(b) will typically be met. That is
because the focus of this criterion is on the per transaction pricing structure
throughout the contract rather than the estimated transaction or usage volumes
for each distinct service period (e.g. each day, month, quarter or year). That is,
during each distinct period, the entity would expect to be entitled to a different
amount of consideration based on the customer’s varying usage of the services
(e.g. 100,000 transactions processed in Month 1; 107,000 processed in
Month 2; 98,500 in Month 3; etc.). As a consequence, it will generally be the
transaction pricing structure that determines whether the allocation objective in
paragraph 606-10-32-28 (and therefore the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-
40(b)) is met.
When the transaction-based pricing structure remains consistent among the
distinct service periods that comprise a SaaS performance obligation (e.g. a
three-year SaaS arrangement), the varying amounts of consideration to which
the entity expects to be entitled each period, which are driven by the
transaction volume, generally meet the allocation objective because those
changing amounts reflect changes in the value to the customer – i.e. the value
to the customer of its access to the SaaS correlates with how much the
customer makes use of the SaaS.
In a contract with a single performance obligation, the presence of a fixed fee
generally will not affect the analysis of whether the variable amounts can be
allocated entirely to a distinct service period within the single performance
obligation. That is because fixed fees are required to be allocated to the entire
performance obligation and cannot be specifically allocated to a distinct good or
service within that performance obligation. As such, this would effectively result
in the same amount of fixed fee allocated to each distinct service period and the
analysis of the variable fees would be the same with or without the fixed fees.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         449
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



However, contracts will often be more complex and the analysis can become
more challenging in contracts with multiple performance obligations or more
complex pricing structures. See Questions E290 through E320.
It is also possible a SaaS provider would be able to recognize revenue for a
SaaS arrangement that includes transaction- or usage-based pricing using the
‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient permitted by paragraph 606-10-55-18.
Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
performance obligation discusses when the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient
can be applied.



                  Example E280.1
                  Transaction-based fees allocated to the period they
                  were earned
XYZ Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers pay a fixed upfront fee and variable amounts based on the number
of transactions processed using XYZ’s solution. Customers are not permitted to
take possession of XYZ’s software; therefore, this is a SaaS arrangement (i.e.
there is no software license transferred to the customers).
XYZ enters into a contract with Customer to use XYZ’s solution for one year.
The arrangement consideration consists of a fixed upfront fee of $1,000 and $5
per transaction processed. The quantity of transactions that will be processed is
not known and will be billed on a monthly basis.
XYZ concludes that the contract consists of a single performance obligation
satisfied over time (see Question F130) of providing access to the hosted
solution to Customer. XYZ also concludes that the performance obligation is a
series of distinct days of service and that a time-based measure of progress is
appropriate for the performance obligation (see Question F240).
XYZ also concludes that variable amounts per transaction should be allocated to
the distinct service period (each day) in which the transaction is processed
because:
— The variable amounts relate specifically to the customer’s usage of the
  SaaS that day.
— Allocating the transaction-based fees to each day is consistent with the
  allocation objective because each day has a similar pricing structure and
  when considering the fixed fee is allocated to all of the days in the contract
  the resulting allocation of potential variable amounts and fixed fees depicts
  what XYZ would expect to receive for each day of service.
The fixed fee is attributable to the entire performance obligation and recognized
ratably over the contract period.
Assume that Customer processes transactions during the year as follows.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                           450
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                                                                                       Transaction-based amount
 Quarter                                Transactions processed                                             billed
 Q1                                                                     100                                               $500
 Q2                                                                      75                                               $375
 Q3                                                                     150                                               $750
 Q4                                                                     125                                               $625

Because the variable amounts are attributed entirely to each day within a given
quarter, the following amounts would be recognized each quarter.

 Quarter                                Fixed fee1                    Variable fees                                      Total
 Q1                                          $ 250                              $ 500                                  $ 750
 Q2                                               250                                375                                    625
 Q3                                               250                                750                                 1,000
 Q4                                               250                                625                                    875
 Total                                       $1,000                             $2,250                                 $3,250

Note:
1.    The total $1,000 fixed fee is recognized ratably over the year using a time based
      measure of progress.
As discussed in Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity
satisfies a performance obligation, entities cannot use multiple measures of
progress for a single performance obligation. In the example above, the variable
fees are allocated to each quarter and recognized using the same measure of
progress as the fixed fee. However, because those fees are only allocated to a
quarter rather than to the entire performance obligation they are recognized
only over the distinct period to which the fees are allocated. The variable and
fixed fees being recognized over a different period is a result of the allocation
guidance and not applying multiple measures of progress to a single
performance obligation.



                  Question E290
                  How do volume-based discounts and rebates affect
                  the allocation of variable consideration in SaaS
                  arrangements?
Interpretive response: Pricing arrangements such as these sometimes apply
to an entire contract term or to distinct periods within the contract that has
variable consideration. For example, a tiered-pricing or volume rebate/credit
structure may apply to each month, quarter or year within a longer-term SaaS
arrangement and reset at the beginning of the next distinct period. These are
just examples as there are many different transaction- and usage-based pricing
structures that exist and they frequently co-exist with varied fixed price
components. The following are examples of tiered pricing in arrangements with
variable consideration.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         451
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



— Per transaction pricing that decreases prospectively as the customer makes
  greater use of the provider’s platform (e.g. $0.10 per transaction for the first
  100 transactions; $0.09 per transaction for the next 100; and $0.075 per
  transaction for those above 200).
— Per transaction pricing that decreases as the customer makes greater
  use of the provider’s platform on a retrospective basis. For example,
  the customer is required to pay $0.10 per transaction for the first
  100 transactions, and if the customer reaches that milestone it will pay
  $0.09 on all transactions going forward and receive a rebate (or credit
  toward future transaction fees) of $0.01 on the first 100 transactions
  processed.
When a SaaS contract has these types of pricing structures, an entity generally
will not be able to allocate per transaction pricing to a distinct period shorter
than the contractual period over which the pricing is resolved or reset because
the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a) would not be met. That is because
when the price per transaction is dependent on a previous purchase, the
variable amount would relate to multiple periods. However, just because the
variable amounts relate to multiple periods does not necessarily mean the fees
must be allocated to the entire performance obligation.
For example, assume that a contract has a single performance obligation to
provide three years of SaaS, with transaction-based pricing.
— If a discount or rebate is earned over the entire three-year period (e.g.
  based on three-year cumulative transaction volumes), then the variable
  consideration would be attributable to the entire performance obligation –
  i.e. when considering the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a), the variable
  consideration (e.g. transaction-based fees) earned on any given day relates
  to the entire performance obligation because those amounts remain
  variable for the entire three-year term.
— If the measurement period for a discount or rebate resets during the
  performance obligation period (e.g. resets each quarter or year of the three-
  year SaaS term) the variable amounts earned each measurement period
  relate specifically to that period and would be allocated entirely to that
  measurement period assuming the other criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-
  40 is met (see Questions E270 and E280).



                  Example E290.1
                  Tiered pricing
XYZ Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers pay variable amounts based on the number of transactions
processed using XYZ’s solution. Customers are not permitted to take
possession of XYZ’s software.
XYZ enters into a contract with Customer to use XYZ’s solution for one year.
The arrangement consideration consists of a fixed upfront fee and tiered per
transaction pricing that resets on a quarterly basis. The per transaction pricing,
which resets each quarter, is as follows.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                           452
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




 Quantity processed                                                                             Price per transaction
 0-1,000                                                                                                                    $10
 1,001-5,000                                                                                                                $ 8
 > 5,000                                                                                                                    $ 5


XYZ concludes that the contract consists of a single performance obligation of
providing Customer access to the hosted solution. XYZ also concludes that the
performance obligation is a series of distinct days of service. Because of the
upfront fee and tiered pricing, the entity concludes it does not qualify to apply
the practical expedient in paragraph 606-10-55-18 to recognize revenue as it has
the right to invoice the customer (see Question F310). XYZ determines that a
time-based measure of progress is appropriate for the performance obligation.
XYZ evaluates whether it should allocate variable amounts entirely to one or
more of the distinct service periods.
XYZ first concludes that it does not meet the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-
40(a) to allocate the amounts earned to each distinct day of service because the
variable amounts are specifically related to the cumulative number of transactions
processed in a quarter rather than each day. That is because the amount earned
on the 5,001st transaction is dependent on the previous purchases during the
quarter so the variable consideration relates to the entity’s efforts to transfer
distinct services for all of the days in the quarter.
However, XYZ concludes that it should allocate the variable amounts entirely to
the quarter in which they are earned. That is because the pricing resets each
quarter such that the variable amounts earned from each transaction processed
relate specifically to XYZ’s efforts to provide the SaaS in the quarter in which
the transaction is processed and, therefore, would meet the criterion in
paragraph 606-10-32-40(a). Further, XYZ concludes that allocating the amounts
to each quarter would meet the allocation objective (i.e. meet the criterion in
paragraph 606-10-32-40(b)) because each quarter has a consistent price
structure throughout the term of the contract (see Question E280).
XYZ needs to estimate the variable amounts (and update that amount until the
end of the contractual quarter) that will be earned each quarter and recognize
those amounts using a time based measure of progress. If the contractual
quarters are co-terminus with the entity’s quarterly reporting periods,
practically, XYZ could recognize the amounts as the transactions are billed and
achieve the same outcome for the reporting period.
However, often times the contractual quarterly periods will not align with the
entity’s quarterly reporting periods. In that case, XYZ will need to estimate the
transaction volumes for the contractual quarterly periods (even though XYZ will
not need to estimate transaction volumes for the full one-year SaaS term) and
update the estimate each reporting period. The requirement to update the
estimate could result in a cumulative catch adjustment during the quarter.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         453
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question E295
                   How do guaranteed minimums affect the allocation
                   of usage-based fees within a series?

Interpretive response: It depends. It is common for SaaS providers that charge
customers variable consideration in the form of usage- or transaction-based
fees to require a customer to pay for a guaranteed amount of usage. For
example, an entity may charge a customer $5 per transaction, but require the
customer to pay for a minimum of 1,000 transactions per year. Substantive
minimums represent fixed consideration.
When a performance obligation comprises a series of distinct service periods –
e.g. distinct daily, monthly or annual periods of service – and a minimum is a
substantive term in the contract, the entity needs to evaluate the variable
consideration allocation criteria in paragraph 606-10-32-40 to determine if the
amounts in excess of the minimum should be allocated to a distinct
service period.
An exception exists if an entity meets the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient
criteria and chooses to apply the expedient. In that case, it does not need to
evaluate the variable consideration allocation guidance. Chapter F – Step 5:
Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation
(specifically, Questions F280 – F330) discusses when the as-invoiced practical
expedient can be applied, including when it can be applied if the arrangement
includes a minimum guarantee.
Practically, there are other scenarios when an entity may not need to evaluate
the variable consideration allocation criteria because the accounting outcome
would not be significantly affected. For example, when an output-based
measure of progress based on usage is appropriate, applying that measure
would achieve the same result as allocating the variable amounts to each
period if:
— the price per use or transaction is the same for the minimum and excess
  quantities; and
— there are no other significant fees other than fixed fees that would be
  allocated to the performance obligation and recognized using the same
  output-based measure of progress.
If such a scenario does not exist and an entity does need to evaluate the
variable consideration criteria in paragraph 606-10-32-40, the following are
relevant considerations for its analysis.
Criterion (a) – Variable payment relates specifically to the entity’s efforts
to transfer the distinct good or service
When a contractual minimum exists, the contract will generally meet criterion
(a) for the entire period covered by the contractual minimum but not for distinct
periods within the larger period covered by the contractual minimum. A contract
will generally meet criterion (a) for the entire period covered by the contractual
minimum because the amounts in excess of the minimum relate to either the
entity’s efforts in transferring the distinct service, or an outcome (e.g. usage) of
transferring the service over the entire contractual minimum service period. For
example, when a contract has an annual minimum, any amounts in excess of




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         454
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



the minimum during the year will generally meet criterion (a) to be allocated to
the year.
However, criterion (a) will generally not be met for distinct periods within the
larger period covered by the substantive contractual minimum. That is because
the variable amounts are triggered only after usage in previous periods and
therefore relate to the usage in the entire period rather than a specific day or
month. For example, when a contract has a substantive annual minimum, any
amounts in excess of the minimum will generally not meet criterion (a) to be
allocated to the month when the minimum is exceeded; this is because the
excess variable amounts relate to cumulative usage for all preceding months
within that year.
If criterion (a) is met, the entity still needs to consider whether allocating the
variable amount in excess of the minimum to a distinct good or service is
consistent with the allocation objective.
Criterion (b) – Allocation is consistent with the allocation objective
To assess criterion (b), an entity needs to consider all the performance
obligations and payment terms in the contract, including the minimum
guaranteed amount. If allocating the amounts in excess of the minimum to one
or more, but not all, distinct service periods does not reflect what an entity
expects to be entitled to for those service periods, the allocation objective is
not met.
In general, the same considerations discussed in Question E280 – involving
whether the allocation objective has been met when allocating variable
consideration to a distinct good or service in a series – apply to contracts with
a minimum. In addition, the following are also relevant to the analysis of
criterion (b) and are illustrated in Example E295.1 below:
— the considerations discussed in Question E300 involving whether changes
  in variable pricing during the contract term preclude allocating variable
  consideration to distinct time increments, which may apply if the minimum
  changes from period to period; and
— how the measure of progress used to recognize the fixed fees (including
  the minimum) affects the total amounts recognized in each period and
  whether those results are consistent with the allocation objective.
Conclusion
If both criteria are met for the period with a substantive contractual minimum,
an entity allocates the variable amounts to that period and recognizes the
variable amounts using the same measure of progress as the fixed fees. As a
result, the entity estimates excess variable amounts for the entire contractual
minimum period and recognizes those amounts over that period. However, if
the contractual minimum period is a month or a quarter that does not cross
reporting periods, then practically the entity will not need to estimate because
the amounts will be known for the reporting period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         455
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                   Example E295.1
                   Allocating variable consideration with a guaranteed
                   minimum
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide a hosted SaaS
solution for three years that is a series of distinct days of service. ABC charges
Customer a usage-based fee that is considered variable consideration. In
addition, ABC charges a nonrefundable upfront fee of $5,000 in exchange for
set-up activities that do not transfer a good or service to the customer. ABC
concludes that there is no material right as a result of the upfront fee.
ABC concludes that it cannot apply the as-invoiced practical expedient as a
result of the upfront fee (see Question F290). Further, ABC concludes that a
time-elapsed measure of progress is appropriate for the stand-ready
performance obligation; this is because ABC expects its costs and effort of
standing ready to be consistent regardless of transaction volume.
Note that ABC would recognize contractual minimums and variable fees
differently than the scenarios below if an output-based measure of progress
were determined to be appropriate.
Scenario 1: Annual minimum
ABC charges a usage-based fee of $5 per transaction and the contract requires
Customer to pay a guaranteed minimum of 1,000 transactions for each annual
period (i.e. 3,000 transactions are guaranteed for the entire contract) and this
minimum is substantive. Customer’s usage above 1,000 transactions in any
annual period results in additional consideration of $5 per transaction to ABC.
ABC concludes that variable amounts in excess of the minimum should be
allocated to the annual period in which they are earned under the contract
because both variable consideration allocation criteria are met for the annual
period.
— Criterion (a) in paragraph 606-10-32-40 is met for the annual period. The
  variable amounts relate specifically to Customer’s usage of the service
  during the annual period because the excess amounts earned in the annual
  period are not dependent on transactions in a previous or future annual
  period.
— Criterion (b) in paragraph 606-10-32-40 is met. The allocation of excess
  variable amounts to the annual period in which they are earned under the
  contract is consistent with the allocation objective; this is because the
  excess amounts earned are commensurate with the benefit to Customer
  (i.e. transactions processed) during that annual period and the pricing is
  consistent in each annual period.
However, ABC cannot allocate the excess fees earned in an annual period
entirely to the day, month or quarter in which the excess fees are earned under
the contract because criterion (a) in paragraph 606-10-32-40 is not met with
respect to those shorter periods. For example, if Customer exceeds 1,000
transactions for Year 1 in Month 9, the excess variable amounts that ABC earns
under the contract in Month 10 cannot be allocated solely to Month 10; this is
because those excess amounts depend on the cumulative transactions in
Months 1–9.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         456
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



At the beginning of each annual period in the contract, ABC estimates the
variable amounts for the annual period subject to the constraint and recognizes
that amount on a time-elapsed basis over the annual period. At each reporting
date within an annual period, ABC reassesses its estimate of the excess
variable amounts for the annual period and updates the amount recognized
during the annual period on a time-elapsed basis.
The entire fixed consideration in the contract of $20,000 (upfront fee of $5,000
+ guaranteed amount of $15,000 (3,000 transactions × $5 per transaction)) is
recognized on a time-elapsed basis over the three-year contract term. In any
given month during the contract period, ABC recognizes 1/36th of the fixed
consideration of $20,000 plus 1/12th of the estimated excess variable amounts
for the respective annual period. ABC allocates changes in estimates of the
excess variable amounts for an annual period evenly to each month within that
annual period and recognizes a cumulative catch-up adjustment for previous
months in an annual period in the month its estimate changes.
Scenario 2: Monthly minimum
Assume the same facts as Scenario 1, except that the substantive minimum is
based on monthly usage of 100 transactions that resets each month – i.e. 3,600
transactions are guaranteed for the entire three-year contract.
ABC concludes that variable amounts in excess of the minimum should be
allocated to each monthly period in which they are earned under the contract
because both variable consideration allocation criteria are met for each monthly
period.
— Criterion (a) in paragraph 606-10-32-40 is met for the monthly period. The
  variable amounts relate specifically to Customer’s usage of the service
  during the monthly period because the excess amounts earned in the
  monthly period are not dependent on transactions in a previous or future
  month.
— Criterion (b) in paragraph 606-10-32-40 is met. The allocation of excess
  variable amounts to the monthly period in which they are earned under the
  contract is consistent with the allocation objective; this is because the
  excess amounts earned are commensurate with the benefit to Customer
  (i.e. transactions processed) during that month and the pricing in each
  period is consistent.
ABC allocates any excess variable amounts to the months in which they are
earned under the contract. The entire fixed consideration in the contract of
$23,000 (upfront fee of $5,000 + guaranteed amount of $18,000 (3,600
transactions × $5 per transaction)) is recognized on a time-elapsed basis over
the three-year contract term.
Scenario 3: Changing minimums – allocation objective not met
Assume the same facts as Scenario 1, except that the annual minimum
increases over time:
— 1,000 transactions in Year 1;
— 2,000 transactions in Year 2; and
— 3,000 transactions in Year 3.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         457
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Additionally, ABC expects at contract inception that it will process a similar
amount of transactions each year (about 3,000) and does not anticipate a
change in the costs of providing the service over the contract period.
ABC concludes that the variable amounts relate to the entire contract and that it
cannot allocate variable amounts to the annual period in which they are earned
because criterion (b) in paragraph 606-10-32-40 is not met. ABC concludes that
criterion (b) is not met because each year is not priced consistently and the
change in minimums over the period is not commensurate with a change in
value to the customer, effort or cost.
In reaching this conclusion, ABC considered the allocation that would result
from allocating variable amounts in each period along with the other
consideration. ABC expects Customer’s usage to be approximately
3,000 transactions each year; because fixed consideration is recognized evenly
over each annual period, allocating the variable amounts to each year would
result in the following amount of revenue recognized in each annual period.

                       Hypothetical allocation – allocation objective not met
                                                                                                               Allocate to
  Annual                      Expected                       Variable               Fixed fees                each annual
  period                         usage                       amounts               recognized                      period
  Year 1                            3,000                     $ 10,0001                $ 11,6673                    $ 21,667
                                                                           2                        3
  Year 2                            3,000                          5,000                  11,667                       16,667

  Year 3                            3,000                                0                11,6673                      11,667
  Total                             9,000                     $ 15,000                 $ 35,000                     $ 50,000

  Notes:
  1.    2,000 transactions (3,000 expected usage – 1,000 minimum) × $5/transaction.
  2.    1,000 transactions (3,000 expected usage – 2,000 minimum) × $5/transaction.
  3.    $35,000 fixed fees ($5,000 upfront fee + $30,000 guaranteed minimum
        (6,000 transactions × $5/transaction)) / 3 years.

By allocating variable amounts to the annual period in which they are earned,
ABC would recognize decreasing revenue (i.e. $21,667 in Year 1, $16,667 in
Year 2 and $11,667 in Year 3) despite providing the same level of stand-ready
service to Customer (with consistent expected costs). Therefore, ABC
concludes that the allocation objective is not met.
Instead, ABC estimates total variable consideration for all three years in the
contract subject to the constraint and includes that amount in the transaction
price. The total transaction price (both variable and fixed) is recognized on a
time-elapsed basis over the three-year contract period. At each reporting date,
ABC reassesses its estimate of the excess variable amounts for the entire
contract and updates the transaction price.
Scenario 4: Changing minimums – allocation objective met
Assume the same facts as Scenario 3, except that ABC expects Customer’s
usage to increase each year in an amount that is commensurate with the
increasing annual minimums. The result in this fact pattern is different from
Scenario 3 in which Customer’s usage is estimated to remain constant despite
increasing annual minimums.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         458
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



ABC concludes that variable amounts in excess of the minimum should be
allocated to the annual period in which they are earned under the contract
because both variable consideration allocation criteria are met for the annual
period.
— Criterion (a) in paragraph 606-10-32-40 is met for the annual period. The
  variable amounts relate specifically to Customer’s usage of the service
  during the annual period because the excess amounts earned in the annual
  period are not dependent on transactions in a previous or future annual
  period.
— Criterion (b) in paragraph 606-10-32-40 is met for the annual period. While
  the minimums increase each year, the increase is commensurate with the
  expected value to the customer and expected usage. When considering all
  of the payment terms, ABC observes that it would recognize a consistent
  amount of revenue in each annual period based on expectations of usage
  that is commensurate with the entity’s time-elapsed measure of progress.

                                            Allocation objective is met
                                                                                                               Allocate to
  Annual                      Expected                       Variable               Fixed fees                each annual
  period                         usage                       amounts               recognized                      period
  Year 1                            2,000                     $ 5,0001                 $ 11,6674                    $ 16,667
  Year 2                            3,000                          5,0002                 11,6674                      16,667
                                                                           3                        4
  Year 3                            4,000                          5,000                  11,667                       16,667
  Total                             9,000                     $ 15,000                 $ 35,000                     $ 50,000

  Notes:
  1.    1,000 transactions (2,000 expected usage – 1,000 minimum) × $5/transaction.
  2.    1,000 transactions (3,000 expected usage – 2,000 minimum) × $5/transaction.
  3.    1,000 transactions (4,000 expected usage – 3,000 minimum) × $5/transaction.
  4.    $35,000 fixed fees ($5,000 upfront fee + $30,000 guaranteed minimum
        (6,000 transactions × $5/transaction)) / 3 years.


Based on this conclusion, ABC:
— estimates the variable amounts subject to the constraint for each annual
  period in the contract at the beginning of each annual period, and
  recognizes that amount on a time-elapsed basis over the respective
  annual period;
— at each reporting date within an annual period, reassesses its estimate of
  the excess variable amounts for that annual period and updates the amount
  recognized on a time-elapsed basis. Changes in estimates of the excess
  variable amounts for the annual period are allocated evenly to each month
  within that annual period, and a cumulative catch-up adjustment is
  recognized for previous months in an annual period in the month the
  estimate changes; and
— recognizes the fixed consideration in the contract of $35,000 (upfront fee of
  $5,000 + guaranteed amount of $30,000 (6,000 transactions × $5 per
  transaction)) on a time-elapsed basis over the entire three-year contract
  term ($11,667 per year).



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         459
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E300
                  Do other changes in the price charged per
                  transaction or usage over the contract term
                  preclude an entity from allocating a variable
                  amount to the period in which it is earned?
Interpretive response: Not necessarily. SaaS arrangements that include
variable fees may have rates or formulas that increase or decrease over the
contract term and those changes are not based on either the entity or
customer’s performance (i.e. the contract price or formula changes solely on
the passage of time). For example, a contract could include per transaction
pricing that changes in each year -- e.g. $0.10 per transaction for Year 1; $0.09
per transaction for Year 2; and $0.075 per transaction for Year 3. In contrast to
volume-based discounts or rebate scenarios described in Question E290, the
change in price is not dependent on either the customer’s usage or the entity’s
performance in prior or future periods.
At the July 2015 meeting, the TRG agreed that in some facts and
circumstances an entity could still allocate variable amounts entirely to the
distinct service period in which it was earned when the price charged per
transaction decreased each year and the change was not dependent on either
the entity or customer’s performance in the prior period. The TRG specifically
discussed an example of IT outsourcing where the price decrease was
consistent with market terms and were linked to changes in costs to fulfill the
service. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 39]
There may be factors other than those discussed by the TRG – i.e. linkage to
market terms or changes in cost structure – that would allow an entity to meet
the allocation objective. However, entities would need evidence to support that
the pricing in the period depicts the amount the entity would expect to be
entitled to in exchange for transferring the distinct good or service. Therefore,
together with the discussion by the TRG, the following additional factors may
be helpful in assessing whether the allocation objective is met when there are
changing prices or formulas:
— Whether the change in price is commensurate with a change in value
  to the customer. The market price of goods or services may change over
  time due to technological advances, market competition or increased
  efficiencies. When market prices change, the value received by the
  customer for the services could also change and the amount the entity
  expects to be entitled to for providing the services may change. Entities
  should support this consideration by evaluating the following (list not
  all inclusive):
      —      The entity’s historical pricing practices and trends. If the entity’s
             historical pricing can demonstrate that the trends in stand-alone pricing
             change in a similar manner, it might indicate that the pricing reflects
             what the entity would expect to receive in those periods. For example,
             if the prices of an annual contract have decreased each year it might
             support a similar decrease from Year 1 to Year 2 in a two-year contract.
      —      Prices charged by competitors for similar services. If the price
             decreases over time because competition in the marketplace makes



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         460
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



             the goods or services less expensive each year, it might indicate that
             the rates in future periods are consistent with what the entity would
             expect to charge for the services in the future period.
      —      The changes in price are commensurate with the changes in effort
             or cost of fulfilling the service. The changes in the entity’s cost could
             also reflect a change in market value. See the discussion below for
             further considerations about changes in cost or effort required to fulfill
             the services.
— Whether the changes are commensurate with (or based on) a market
  index. For example, when the price increases each year based on a
  relevant market index it would indicate that the price in each period depicts
  what the entity would charge in those periods. Paragraph 606-10-32-39(b)
  indicates that allocating a change in price based on an inflation index would
  be consistent with the allocation objective.
— Whether the change in price is commensurate with the effort or cost
  required to fulfill the services. When the entity’s cost of performing the
  services decreases over time this may indicate that the price charged in
  future years would depict the amount the entity would expect to receive for
  services in those periods. For example, the TRG discussed an IT
  outsourcing contract where the rate charged for the activities underlying the
  IT service obligation reflects the increased complexity of the underlying
  activities that will be performed earlier in the contract period versus later in
  the contract period, requiring more experienced (i.e. more costly) personnel
  to perform the activities at the outset.
Notwithstanding the above, if the prices change because of an incentive for the
customer to enter into the contract or pricing in one period reflects value
attributable to another period, the allocation objective likely would not be met.



                  Example E300.1
                  Changing prices – allocation objective is met
XYZ Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers pay a fixed upfront fee and variable amounts based on the number
of transactions processed using XYZ’s solution. Customers are not permitted to
take possession of XYZ’s software; therefore, this is a SaaS arrangement (i.e.
there is no software license in the arrangement).
XYZ enters into a contract with Customer to use XYZ’s solution for three years.
XYZ concludes that the contract consists of a single performance obligation
satisfied over time (see Question F130) of providing access to the hosted
solution by Customer. XYZ also concludes that the performance obligation is a
series of distinct days of service and that a time-based measure of progress is
appropriate for the performance obligation (see Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize
revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation).
The arrangement consideration consists of a fixed upfront fee of $1,000 and a
price per transaction as follows:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         461
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



— Year 1 - $10 per transaction
— Year 2 - $8 per transaction
— Year 3 - $6 per transaction
The price decreases each period because XYZ is in a highly competitive market
with technological advances making more technology available to its customers
each year, and the entity’s historical pricing trends demonstrate that pricing
from comparable contracts from one year to the next change in a
commensurate manner. Further, the entity’s cost of providing the services
continues to decrease as more customers are added to the platform that is
scalable.
XYZ concludes that variable amounts per transaction should be allocated to the
distinct service period (each day) in which the transaction is processed because:
— The variable amounts relate directly to the customer’s usage of the SaaS.
  That is, the amount earned in each period is not dependent on future or
  past transactions.
— The allocation is consistent with the allocation objective because the price
  charged in Year 1, 2 and 3 depict what the entity would expect to be
  entitled to in those periods as demonstrated by the changes being
  commensurate with market trends and the entity’s cost of fulfilling
  the service.
The fixed fee is attributable to the entire performance obligation and recognized
ratably over the contract period. Because the variable amounts are allocated
entirely to the periods in which they are earned, XYZ would recognize the
variable fees in the months the transactions are processed.



                  Example E300.2
                  Changing prices – allocation objective is not met
Assume the same facts as Example 300.1 except that the price per transaction
is as follows:
— Year 1 - $5 per transaction
— Year 2 - $10 per transaction
— Year 3 - $8 per transaction
XYZ offered Customer a significant discount on the transaction-based pricing in
the first year as an inducement to enter into the contract and then charges the
customer an amount higher than what it normally charges in Year 2 and Year 3
in order to recover some of the shortfall in Year 1.
XYZ concludes that variable amounts per transaction should not be allocated to
the distinct service period (each day or the year) in which the transaction is
processed. While the variable amounts relate specifically to the customer’s
usage of the SaaS (i.e. the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a) is met because
the amount earned in each period is not dependent on future or past
transactions), allocating the transaction-based fees to each day is inconsistent
with the allocation objective (i.e. the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(b) is not
met). That is because XYZ priced the first year significantly below what it would
price similar services to its customers and Year 2 and Year 3 are incremental to



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         462
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



what the entity would normally charge customers in future periods. This pricing
structure indicates that some of the price in Year 2 and Year 3 relates to
services provided in Year 1. As such, allocating the fees based on the
contractual rates would not be consistent with the allocation objective because
the amounts per transaction do not depict the amount the entity would expect
to receive for providing those distinct services.
XYZ would estimate the transaction price for the entire three-year period, which
would include the fixed fees and the total transaction-based fees and recognize
the transaction price ratably over the three-year period. XYZ would be required
to update the transaction price each period and make corresponding
adjustments to the transaction price and the revenue recognized.



                  Example E300.3
                  Per user pricing – allocation objective is met
BB Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers pay a monthly fee based on the number of distinct users that log
into the system each month. Customers are not permitted to take possession
of BB’s software.
BB enters into a contract with Customer Y to use its solution for three years. BB is
required to perform significant set-up activities that do not provide an incremental
benefit to Customer Y and are not a promised good or service in the contract (see
Question C220). BB also charges a fixed monthly fee.
BB concludes that the user-based provision is variable consideration rather than
an option to acquire incremental services. That is because the user-based fee
merely describes how the customer will compensate BB for the single service.
BB also considered the following based on Questions C390 and C400:
— Customer Y does not have to obtain anything incremental from BB for
  each user.
— Customer Y is not required to execute an additional contract for each user.
— Customer Y does not need to make an incremental request for each user.
— The number of users or change in number of users does not create an
  additional or new obligation for the remainder of the term. Rather it resets
  each month and Customer Y has the same obligation each month
  regardless of the number of users.
— An additional user does not create an incremental right that increases the
  overall capabilities of the solution. That is, Customer Y’s rights and ability to
  derive benefit from access to the hosted solution are the same each
  month.
The per user per month fee changes during the three-year term as follows:
— Year 1 - $8 per user
— Year 2 - Year 1 price × (lesser of 1.03 of Year 1 pricing or 1+ increase in
  consumer price index)
— Year 3 - Year 2 price × (lesser of 1.03 of Year 2 pricing or 1+ increase in
  consumer price index)



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         463
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



BB concludes that the per user amounts should be allocated entirely to each
month because:
— the variable amounts relate directly to the customer’s usage of the service in
  that time period and meet the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a); and
— the allocation is consistent with the allocation objective because the price
  charged in each month depicts the amount the entity would charge for
  those services in those periods. While the price increases each year,
  because that amount is based on an inflation index the change is
  commensurate with the market value for the services.



                  Example E300.4
                  Per user pricing – allocation objective is not met
Assume the same facts as Example E300.3 except the following:
BB is required to perform significant set-up activities that do not provide an
incremental benefit to Customer Y and are not a promised good or service in the
contract (see Question C220). BB incurs significant costs for these efforts and
prices its subsequent services in a manner in which it expects to recover the
costs in the first year of service. BB and its competitors typically do not charge
customers separately for the set-up activities and price those costs into the
first year of service. BB also charges a fixed monthly fee.
The per user per month fee changes during the three-year term and is as
follows:
— Year 1 - $10 per user
— Year 2 - $8 per user
— Year 3 - $8 per user
BB concludes that the per user amounts should not be allocated entirely to
each month. While the variable amounts relate directly to the customer’s usage
of the service, allocating the transaction-based fees to each day is inconsistent
with the allocation objective.
While the pricing is consistent with its customary pricing practices and relates
to recovering the set-up costs, BB concludes that the change in price from
Year 1 to Year 2 is not commensurate with changes in value or efforts in
fulfilling the services transferred to the customer (e.g. the hosted application).
The per user fees in Year 1 would not depict the amount the entity would
normally charge because the amount is incremental to what it would normally
charge for those services. BB would not consider the cost of the set-up
activities because those are not a fulfillment cost of the distinct service to
which it would allocate the fee. In other words, the set-up activities do not
justify the incremental Year 1 fee because they do not transfer a good or
service to the customer. The value to the customer of the service is the same
each year of the three-year term.
BB would estimate the transaction price for the entire three-year period
and recognize the transaction price based on an appropriate measure
of progress.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         464
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E310
                  Can the allocation objective be met if zero
                  consideration is allocated to a performance
                  obligation?
Interpretive response: No. Allocating zero consideration to a performance
obligation would not be consistent with the allocation objective. This view is
consistent with the FASB view that an allocation of the transaction price should
not result in an allocation of zero to a performance obligation because, by
definition, a distinct good or service must have value to the customer on a
stand-alone basis. See Question E170.
In order to meet the allocation objective, an entity needs to consider all of the
payment terms and performance obligations in the contract. Therefore, the
evaluation could become more complex in scenarios that involve multiple
performance obligations.
For example, if an entity had a contract with two performance obligations (e.g.
software-as-a-service and implementation services) but only charged a variable
amount based on usage of one of the performance obligations (e.g. a
transaction-based fee for the SaaS), it would be inappropriate to allocate the
variable amounts entirely to only the one performance obligation on which the
variable amount is based.



                  Example E310.1
                  Upfront professional services and SaaS
ABC Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers generally pay a usage-based fee based on the number of transactions
processed. Customers are not permitted to take possession of ABC’s software.
ABC and Customer enter into a contract for Customer to use ABC’s SaaS for
three years and charges $10 per transaction processed.
As part of the contract, ABC agrees to perform professional services before
Customer goes live with ABC’s hosted solution. ABC concludes the contract
contains two performance obligations: the SaaS and the professional services
(see Question C280), both of which are satisfied over time (see Questions F130
and F190). ABC also concludes that the SaaS is a single performance obligation
that is composed of a series of distinct daily service periods. ABC typically
charges $100 per hour for professional services and estimates the upfront
professional services will take 200 hours to complete. ABC charges similar
customers $10 per transaction for its hosted solution when sold separately.
ABC must evaluate whether the variable amounts should be allocated entirely
to one or more, but not all, of the performance obligations in the contract. Even
though the per transaction amounts relate specifically to the usage of the
hosted solution (i.e. the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a) is met), ABC
concludes the allocation objective is not met (i.e. the criterion in paragraph 606-
10-32-40(b) is not met) because a reasonable amount of consideration would
not be allocated to the professional services. As a result, ABC allocates the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          465
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



transaction price to the performance obligations on a relative stand-alone selling
price basis.
ABC estimates that the stand-alone selling price of the professional services is
$20,000 ($100 per hour × 200 estimated hours) and $180,000 ($10 per
transaction × 18,000 estimated number of transactions) for the hosted solution
(i.e. that is, the price charged per transaction is consistent with prices charged
to similarly-situated customers on a stand-alone basis). ABC estimates a
transaction price of $180,000 ($10 × 18,000 estimated transactions) and
concludes the amount does not need to be constrained because of extensive
experience with other similar contracts and the likelihood of a significant
reversal is diminished because the performance obligation is satisfied over time
(see Question D180).
At contract inception, ABC allocates the transaction price as follows.

 Performance                              Stand-alone                   Selling price                 Transaction price
 obligation                               selling price                         ratio                        allocation
 Professional
 services                                      $ 20,000                              10%                           $ 18,000
 SaaS                                            180,000                             90%                             162,000
 Total                                         $200,000                            100%                            $180,000


ABC would recognize the $18,000 as it satisfies its performance obligation for
the professional services over time. After the professional services are
completed, but before the SaaS period begins, ABC would have recorded the
following cumulative amounts:

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Contract asset                                                                        18,000
  Revenue – professional services                                                                                      18,000

ABC would also evaluate whether the variable amounts allocated to the SaaS
performance obligation – that is 90% of each dollar of variable consideration --
can be further allocated to the distinct service periods to which the variable
amount relates. ABC concludes that the requirements to allocate the variable
consideration are met because the variable amounts relate specifically to
Customer using the SaaS and allocating the remaining variable amounts to each
day would be consistent with the allocation objective because ABC typically
prices similar services on a similar per transaction basis and the amounts are
consistent across the contract period.
As a result, as each transaction is processed, 10% of the consideration reduces
the contract asset and 90% is allocated to the distinct service period and
recognized as revenue. If the estimated transaction price changes, ABC would
only adjust the amount recognized for professional services because changes in
variable amounts for the SaaS would be allocated entirely to the period in which
the variability was resolved in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-44. That is,
the variable amounts allocated to the SaaS are allocated to the distinct period in
which the transaction is processed and a change in transaction price (based on
estimated number of transactions) would similarly be allocated to the distinct
period the transaction is processed.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          466
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Year 1
Customer processed 8,000 transactions and ABC billed Customer $80,000.
ABC records the following amounts.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   80,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                        8,0001
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      72,0002
  Notes:
  1.    $80,000 × 10%.
  2.    $80,000 × 90%.


At the end of Year 1, ABC adjusts its estimate of the transaction price to
$200,000 because it anticipates processing 2,000 more transactions than
originally estimated. As a result, ABC allocates 10% of the change to the
professional services in accordance with the relative allocation established at
contract inception. ABC records the following amounts.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Contract asset                                                                          2,000
  Revenue – professional services                                                                                       2,0001
  Note:
  1.    (($200,000 × 10%) – $18,000).


Year 2
Customer processed 9,000 transactions resulting in additional billings of
$90,000. ABC records the following amounts.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   90,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                        9,0001
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      81,0002
  Notes:
  1.    $90,000 × 10%.
  2.    $90,000 × 90%.


At the end of Year 2, ABC adjusts its estimate of the transaction price to
$240,000 because it anticipates processing 4,000 more transactions than its
previous estimate. ABC concludes that because both performance obligations
have already been allocated an amount of consideration equal to its stand-alone
selling price at contract inception that the excess variable consideration should
be allocated entirely to the SaaS in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-40 as
it relates specifically to Customer’s usage of that service and the per
transaction price is consistent with a per transaction stand-alone selling price.
As a result, the change in estimate does not affect revenue previously
recognized but only the period the variable amount is allocated to in the future.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          467
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Year 3
Customer processed the remaining 7,000 transactions and ABC billed Customer
$70,000. ABC records the following amounts.
                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   70,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                        3,0001
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      67,0002
  Notes:
  1.    $20,000 – $8,000 – $9,000.
  2.    $70,000 – $3,000.


Alternative approach
The example above illustrates just one approach and is dependent upon facts
and circumstances and the appropriate application of judgment. Other
approaches may be acceptable if it can be demonstrated that they are
consistent with the allocation objective. In the example above, if the stand-
alone selling prices for the professional services and the SaaS, a daily stand-
ready obligation, were ranges, then it may be less apparent that the excess
variability in transaction price should be allocated entirely to the SaaS.
Consequently, in situations where the stand-alone selling prices are ranges, an
entity might estimate the total discount in the contract ($20,000 of the ‘free’
implementation services) and allocate that amount on a relative basis between
the performance obligations using the most recent estimate of volumes to be
processed. Under this approach, in each period an entity would update its
estimate of the total expected per transaction fees and allocate the discount on
a proportionate basis between the professional services and SaaS.
Under both approaches, changes in the transaction price would be allocated to
the period the transactions are processed in accordance with paragraph 606-10-
32-40. Any change is a result of a change in estimate rather than a change in
pricing that is dependent upon past or future purchase (i.e. the change is not a
result of tiered pricing, rebates or discounts). Said differently, changes in
estimates of the transaction price are allocated in the same manner as the
original allocation in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-43 and 32-44.
Under both approaches the entity would initially allocate $18,000 to
implementation and the remaining amount to SaaS and the following illustrates
the accounting from that point forward.
Year 1
Customer processed 8,000 transactions and ABC billed Customer $80,000.
ABC records the following amounts.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   80,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                        8,0001
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      72,0002




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                           468
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




  Notes:
  1.    $80,000 × 10%.
  2.    $80,000 × 90%.


ABC adjusts its estimate of the transaction price to $200,000 because it
anticipates processing 2,000 more transactions than originally estimated. As a
result, ABC re-allocates the discount based on the updated transaction price.
The $20,000 discount is allocated to the SaaS as follows [$20,000 × ($200,000
÷ $220,000)] = $18,181. As a result, the entity would allocate $181,819
($200,000 – $18,181) to the SaaS and $18,181 to the professional services.
ABC would adjust the professional services as follows.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
                                                                                                 1
  Contract asset                                                                           181
  Revenue – professional services                                                                                           181
  Note:
  1.    $18,181 – $18,000.


Year 2
Customer processed 9,000 transactions resulting in additional billings of
$90,000. ABC records the following amounts.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   90,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                        8,1821
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      81,8182
  Notes:
  1.    $90,000 × ($20,000 ÷ $220,000).
  2.    $90,000 × ($200,000 ÷ $220,000).

ABC adjusts its estimate of the transaction price to $240,000 because it
anticipates processing 4,000 more transactions than its previous estimate. As a
result, ABC reallocates the discount based on the updated transaction price.
The $20,000 discount is allocated to the SaaS as follows [$240,000 × ($20,000
÷ $260,000)] = $18,461. As a result, the entity would allocate $221,539 to the
SaaS ($240,000 – $18,461) and $18,461 to the implementation services. ABC
would adjust the implementation services revenue as follows.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
                                                                                                 1
  Contract asset                                                                           280
  Revenue – Professional Services                                                                                           280
  Note:
  1.    $18,461 – $18,181.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                           469
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Year 3
Customer processed the remaining 7,000 transactions and ABC billed the
customer $70,000. ABC records the following amounts.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   70,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                        2,2791
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      67,7212
  Notes:
  1.    $18,461 – $8,000 – $8,182.
  2.    $70,000 – $2,279.




                  Example E310.2
                  Upfront professional services and SaaS – tiered
                  pricing
ABC Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers generally pay a usage-based fee based on the number of
transactions processed. Customers are not permitted to take possession of
ABC’s software. ABC and Customer enter into a contract for Customer to use
ABC’s SaaS for three years and charges the following per transaction amount
that resets each year.

 Quantity processed                                                                             Price per transaction
 0-1,000                                                                                                                    $10
 1,001-5,000                                                                                                                $ 8
 > 5,000                                                                                                                    $ 6

As part of the contract, ABC agrees to perform professional services before
Customer goes live with ABC’s hosted solution. ABC concludes the contract
contains two performance obligations: the SaaS and the professional services
(see Question C280), both of which are satisfied over time (see Questions F130
and F190). ABC also concludes that the SaaS is a single performance obligation
that is comprised of a series of distinct daily service periods and the usage-
based fee is variable consideration.

ABC typically charges $100 per hour for professional services and estimates the
professional services will take 200 hours to complete. ABC charges similar
customers the same per transaction pricing for its hosted solution when sold
separately.
ABC must evaluate whether the variable amounts should be allocated entirely
to one or more, but not all, of the performance obligations in the contract. Even
though the per transaction amounts are calculated based on the usage of the
hosted solution, ABC concludes the allocation objective is not met because a
reasonable amount of consideration would not be allocated to the professional




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          470
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



services. As a result, ABC allocates the transaction price to the performance
obligations on a relative stand-alone selling price basis.
ABC concludes that the stand-alone selling price of the professional services is
$20,000 ($100 per hour × 200 estimated hours) and $180,000 for the hosted
solution. The pricing structure is consistent with prices charged to similarly
situated customers on a stand-alone basis, and ABC estimates the stand-alone
selling price for the hosted solution based on an estimate of 8,000 transactions
processed in each year or $60,000 per annual period as follows.

 Quantity                                    Price per
 processed                                transaction                             Per year                      Total price
 0-1,000                                               $10                            1,000                          $10,000
 1,001-5,000                                           $ 8                            4,000                            32,000
 > 5,000                                               $ 6                            3,000                            18,000
 Total                                                                                8,000                          $60,000

ABC estimates a transaction price of $180,000 ($60,000 per year × 3 years) and
concludes the amount does not need to be constrained because of extensive
experience with other similar contracts and the likelihood of a significant
reversal is diminished because the performance obligation is satisfied over time
(see Question D180).
At contract inception, ABC allocates the transaction price as follows.
 Performance                                 Stand-alone                                              Transaction price
 obligation                                  selling price          Selling price ratio                      allocation

 Professional services                            $ 20,000                               10%                       $ 18,000
 SaaS                                               180,000                              90%                         162,000

 Total                                            $200,000                             100%                        $180,000


ABC would recognize the $18,000 as it satisfied its performance obligation for
the professional services. After the professional services are completed, but
before the SaaS period begins, ABC records the following entry.
                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Contract asset                                                                        18,000
  Revenue – professional services                                                                                     18,0001
  Note:
  1.    $180,000 × 10%.


ABC would also evaluate whether the variable amounts allocated to the SaaS
performance obligation – that is 90% of each dollar of variable consideration --
can be further allocated to the distinct service periods to which the variable
amount relates. ABC concludes that the requirements to allocate the variable
consideration to each day/month are not met because the variable amounts
relate specifically to an entire annual period due to the tiered pricing (see
Question E290).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          471
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



ABC next evaluates whether the variable amounts allocated to the SaaS
performance obligation can be allocated entirely to the annual period to which it
relates. ABC concludes that the fee relates specifically to the annual periods
and that allocating the variable amount to each annual period is consistent with
the allocation objective because ABC typically prices similar services on a
similar basis and the pricing structure is consistent in each annual period.
As a result, ABC would estimate the number of transactions that would be
processed in each annual period and recognize that amount over each annual
period based on an appropriate measure of progress. If the estimated
transaction price changes, ABC would adjust the amount recognized for
professional services. Further, for the portion of the change in transaction price
related to a change in the expected number of transactions in the current
annual period, the entity would make an adjustment to revenue recognized for
the SaaS. However, for any portion of the transaction price change related to an
estimate of transactions to be processed in future annual periods, the entity
would only make an adjustment to amounts recognized for professional
services because the portion related to the SaaS is allocated entirely to the
period in which the variability was resolved.
Year 1
ABC concludes that a time-elapsed measure of progress is appropriate for the
SaaS performance obligation and recognizes the $54,000 allocated to the first
year ratably over the first year. At the end of June of Year 1, ABC adjusts its
estimate of transactions to be processed in each year to 9,000 transactions or
$66,000 per year. As such, the total transaction price increased to $198,000.
ABC records the following amount of revenue for the first half of Year 1 and
adjustment to professional services (for which $18,000 had already been
recognized) based on the change in transaction price.
                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Contract asset                                                                        31,500
  Revenue – professional services                                                                                       1,8001
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      29,7002
  Notes:
  1.    ($198,000 × 10%) – $18,000.
  2.    (($198,000 × 90%) ÷ 3) × 50%.


Through the first six months, Customer had processed 5,000 transactions and
ABC billed Customer $42,000 (1,000 × $10 + 4,000 × $8). ABC records the
following amounts.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   42,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                       42,000

At the end of Year 1, Customer has processed an additional 4,000 transactions
billed the customer $24,000 (4,000 × $6) and ABC records the following
amounts.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          472
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   24,000
  Contract asset                                                                          5,700
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      29,7001
  Note:
  1.    ((($198,000 × 90%) ÷ 3) × 100%) – $29,700.


Year 2
Customer processed 9,000 transactions resulting in additional billings of
$66,000. ABC records the following amounts as of the end of the year.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   66,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                        6,6001
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      59,4002
  Notes:
  1.    $66,000 × 10%.
  2.    $66,000 × 90%.


Year 3
Customer processed the remaining 9,000 transactions and ABC billed Customer
$66,000. ABC records the following amounts as of the end of the year.

                                                                                          Debit                         Credit
  Accounts receivable                                                                   66,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                        6,6001
  Revenue – SaaS                                                                                                      59,4002
  Notes:
  1.    $66,000 × 10%.
  2.    $66,000 × 90%.




                  Question E320
                  Can variable consideration be allocated entirely to
                  one performance obligation and fixed consideration
                  be allocated entirely to another performance
                  obligation?
Interpretive response: Yes, provided the criteria to allocate the variable
consideration entirely to a single performance obligation are met.
In contrast to the discussions in Questions and Examples in E280 through
E300, when the contract has multiple performance obligations, the entity needs




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         473
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



to consider whether the allocation objective is met with respect to all of the
performance obligations in the contract. As such, the entity will need to
evaluate whether allocating variable fees entirely to one performance obligation
would result in amounts allocated to each performance obligation that would
reasonably depict the amount of consideration that the entity expects for
satisfying that performance obligation.
Example 35 Case A in Topic 606 (paragraphs 606-10-55-271 through 55-274)
illustrates a fact pattern where variable consideration is allocated entirely to one
performance obligation and the remaining fixed consideration is allocated
entirely to another performance obligation. In that example, the fixed amount of
consideration approximated the stand-alone selling price of one performance
obligation and the variable amounts approximated the stand-alone selling price
of another performance obligation.
In contrast, Example 35 Case B (paragraphs 606-10-55-275 through 55-279)
illustrates a fact pattern where the variable amounts could not be allocated
entirely to a single performance obligation because it would have resulted in
more than stand-alone selling price allocated to one performance obligation and
less than stand-alone selling price being allocated to the other
performance obligation.
As discussed in Question E260, the entity first applies the guidance on
allocating variable consideration and then allocates the remaining consideration.
However, the evaluation of whether the allocation objective is met should
consider the resulting allocation of both the fixed and variable consideration in
the contract.
Based on Example 35, when the variable prices are incremental to what the
entity would normally charge for that performance obligation it would indicate
that the variable amounts relate to more than one performance obligation and
should not be allocated entirely to one performance obligation. However, if the
variable amounts were equal to or less than the price the entity would normally
charge for a performance obligation the variable amounts could still be entirely
allocated to a single performance obligation if the allocation of the other
consideration in the contract reflects a reasonable allocation for the entire
contract. For example, if a contract with two performance obligations included
transaction-based fees at a price per transaction less than the price normally
charged and fixed fees that were incremental to the stand-alone selling price of
the other performance obligation, allocating the variable amount entirely to one
performance obligation and the fixed consideration between the two
performance obligations may be consistent with the allocation objective.



                  Example E320.1
                  Variable consideration allocated entirely to one
                  performance obligation in the contract
ABC Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers generally pay a usage-based fee based on the number of
transactions processed. Customers are not permitted to take possession of
ABC’s software. ABC and Customer enter into a contract for Customer to use




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         474
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



ABC’s SaaS for three years and charges $10 per transaction processed and a
fixed upfront fee of $20,000.
As part of the contract, ABC agrees to perform professional services before
Customer goes live with ABC’s hosted solution. ABC concludes the contract
contains two performance obligations: the SaaS and the professional services,
both of which are satisfied over time. ABC also concludes that the SaaS is a
single performance obligation that is composed of a series of distinct daily
service periods. However, the professional services are not a series.
ABC estimates that the stand-alone selling price of the professional services is
$20,000. ABC charges similar customers $10 per transaction for its hosted
solution on a stand-alone basis.
ABC allocates the variable fees entirely to the SaaS because:
— the variable payment relates specifically to Customer’s usage of the SaaS;
  and
— allocating the variable amounts charged entirely to the SaaS and the fixed
  amount to the professional services would depict what the entity would
  expect to be entitled to for each service on a stand-alone basis.
ABC allocates the fixed amounts entirely to the professional services and
recognizes that amount as it satisfies the performance obligation. The variable
amounts are allocated to the SaaS performance obligation. ABC could either
apply the practical expedient to recognize the variable amounts as the entity has
the right to bill (see Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the
entity satisfies a performance obligation) or allocate the fees to each distinct
service period. Either would provide the same result.



                  Example E320.2
                  Fixed consideration allocated to multiple
                  performance obligations and variable consideration
                  allocated entirely to one performance obligation
Consider the same facts as Example E320.1 except that:
— The price stated in the contract for professional services is a fixed amount
  of $30,000 while stand-alone selling price is $20,000.
— The price stated in the contract for the transaction-based fees is $9 per
  transaction processed while it normally charges similar customers $10 per
  transaction on a stand-alone basis.
ABC estimates that it will be entitled to variable consideration of $90,000 based
on its estimate of processing 10,000 transactions. On an absolute dollar basis,
the estimated stand-alone selling price of the SaaS is $100,000 ($10 per
transaction × 10,000 estimated transactions). The difference between the
discounted variable amounts ($90,000) and the estimated stand-alone selling
price is $10,000.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         475
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



ABC allocates the variable fees entirely to the SaaS because:
— the variable payments relate specifically to usage of the SaaS; and
— allocating the variable amounts charged for the SaaS would be consistent
  with the allocation objective because the allocation of the fixed
  consideration to both the SaaS and the professional services would depict
  the amounts the entity would expect to receive and normally charge for the
  SaaS and the professional services.
After the allocation of variable consideration, ABC allocates the fixed
consideration. The fixed consideration would be allocated based on the general
guidance that requires a relative stand-alone selling price allocation. However, in
order to be consistent with the allocation objective, ABC would reduce the
stand-alone selling price of the SaaS by the estimated variable consideration
allocated to the SaaS. In this example, the stand-alone selling price of the SaaS
is $100,000, which would be reduced to $10,000 by the estimate of $90,000 of
variable consideration allocated to the SaaS. As such, the fixed consideration of
$30,000 would be allocated as follows:
— $20,000 to professional services [$20,000 ÷ ($20,000 + $10,000) ×
  $30,000]
— $10,000 to SaaS [$10,000 ÷ ($20,000 + $10,000) × $30,000]



                  Question E330
                  If a contract contains different types of variable
                  consideration, does all of the variable consideration
                  need to be allocated in the same manner?
Interpretive response: No. An entity should apply the guidance to each type of
variable consideration within a contract. It is common to have multiple variable
payment streams in an individual contract. Depending on the facts and
circumstances, an entity could conclude that some variable amounts meet the
requirements to be allocated to one or more, but not all, distinct goods or
services while other variable amounts in the same contract are attributable to all
of the distinct goods or services.
For example, at the July 2015 meeting, the TRG discussed a fact pattern
involving hotel management services with several variable payment streams
and agreed that different payments could be allocated to different parts of the
contract. In that example, a multi-year contract for daily distinct services
included annual performance bonuses, monthly variable fees based on hotel
occupancy and daily reimbursements of costs to fulfill the contract. The TRG
agreed that in the fact pattern described, allocating the performance bonus to
the annual period (i.e. the bonus would be recognized over the entire period),
the monthly occupancy fees entirely to each month and daily cost
reimbursements to each day would meet the requirements in paragraph 606-
10-32-40. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 39]
Example E330.1 illustrates a SaaS example with multiple variable payment
streams allocated to an annual period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         476
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Example E330.1
                  Multiple variable payments in one contract allocated
                  to the period they were earned
XYZ Corp. provides a hosted software application to customers and charges
variable amounts based on the number of users each month, which varies and
is measured on a resetting basis each month. XYZ concluded that the user-
based provision is variable consideration rather than an option to acquire
incremental services. That is because the user-based fee merely describes how
the customer will compensate XYZ for the single service (see Questions C390
and C400 and Example C390.2). Customers are not permitted to take
possession of XYZ’s software.
XYZ enters into a contract with Customer A to use XYZ’s application for one
year. XYZ charges $5 per month for each user. The number of users that will
access the application during the contract term is not known.
The contract also has a service level agreement (SLA) under which XYZ
warrants that the hosted application will be available and functioning to
specifications during the service period at least 99% of the time (i.e. the
maximum percentage of down-time for maintenance or due to increased
network traffic will be one percent). In any quarter that the downtime is greater
than 1%, Customer will be entitled to a 10% credit of that quarter’s fees
against the next month’s payment. XYZ concludes that the SLA is variable
consideration (see Question D170 for further details).
XYZ concludes that the contract consists of a single performance obligation
satisfied over time of providing access to the hosted solution to Customer A.
XYZ also concludes that the performance obligation is a series of distinct days
of service and that a time-based measure of progress is appropriate for the
performance obligation (see Question F240).
XYZ concludes that the contract has two types of variable consideration, the
monthly per user fees and the SLA. As such, XYZ evaluates whether
those amounts should be allocated entirely to one or more distinct
service periods.
XYZ first evaluates the monthly per user fee. XYZ concludes that the per user
amounts should be allocated entirely to each month. The variable amounts
relate directly to the customer’s usage of the service in that time period and
meet the criterion in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a). Further, the price per user is
consistent each month and would depict the amount the entity would charge to
provide those services on a monthly basis.
XYZ then evaluates the SLA. XYZ concludes the SLA relates directly to its
efforts or an outcome based on its performance in each quarter because the
refund is attributed to its failure to provide the level of service promised in the
contract. As such, XYZ concludes the SLA should be allocated to each quarter
rather than each month because the SLA is based on its cumulative
performance in a quarter.
XYZ then evaluates whether allocating the SLA to each quarter would be
consistent with the allocation objective. XYZ concludes that allocating the SLA
to each quarter would be consistent with the allocation objective when




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         477
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



considering that the formula ascribed to each quarter is consistent from period
to period and would depict what XYZ would expect to be entitled to in
exchange for that level of performance each quarter.
XYZ not only needs to consider the allocation of the payments individually but it
must also consider the allocation of all of the payment terms. As such, because
the per user fee and SLA relate to different service periods, XYZ needs to
consider whether allocating the fees to different periods is consistent with the
allocation objective. XYZ concludes that allocating the per user fee and SLA to
different periods is consistent with the allocation objective because each month
in a quarter is in effect allocated its proportion (i.e. one-third of the quarterly
amount recognized) of the SLA and the amount allocated to each month depicts
a per user fee reduced by any service level penalties. XYZ notes this conclusion
is consistent with the TRG discussion and that the SLA is akin to a performance
bonus (although structured as a penalty) and the per user fee is similar to a
monthly occupancy fee.



                   Question E335
                   How does an entity evaluate the variable
                   consideration allocation guidance for a series of
                   distinct quantities?
Interpretive response: When a single performance obligation consists of a
series of distinct quantities, the entity evaluates the criteria to allocate variable
consideration to one or more, but not all distinct goods or services in a contract
(Allocating variable consideration section in this chapter) to determine if it may
allocate variable fees to each quantity rather than a time period.
For example, if a performance obligation consists of a promise to process
25 transactions rather than a series of distinct time periods (i.e. the service is
not a stand-ready obligation), the entity evaluates whether it may allocate any
variable amounts to each transaction instead of a time period.



                   Example E335.1
                   Variable consideration allocated in a series of
                   distinct quantities
ABC Co. enters into a contract with Customer to process one transaction each
month for the following year using its SaaS platform. ABC charges the
customer 5% of the total dollar amount processed in each transaction.
ABC concludes that the contract has a single performance obligation consisting
of a series of distinct services and that the nature of the promise is to process
12 transactions rather than a service of standing ready (see Chapter C – Step 2:
Identify the performance obligations in the contract). Further, because the
ultimate amount of consideration to be received is unknown, the contract has
variable consideration.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         478
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



ABC concludes that it should allocate the variable fees entirely to each
transaction as it occurs because:
— the variable payment relates specifically to each transaction and the amount
  is not dependent on past or future transactions; and
— allocating the variable amounts to the transaction would depict what the
  entity expects to be entitled to for each on a stand-alone basis because
  each transaction is priced the same (i.e. the formula is the same)
  throughout the contract period and the changes in the dollar amount reflect
  the additional value to the customer for processing larger or smaller
  transactions.



                  Question E340
                  Can a significant financing component be allocated
                  entirely to one or more, but not all, performance
                  obligations?
Interpretive response: Yes, in some cases. At the March 2015 meeting, the
TRG agreed that in some circumstances a significant financing component (if
one is deemed to exist – see Questions D230 – D340) could be allocated to one
or more, but not all, of the performance obligations in the contract. This is a
different question from that in Question D310, which concludes that, for
purposes of determining whether a significant financing component exists, an
entity will generally allocate each payment received to all of the performance
obligations in the contract on a pro rata basis to calculate the financing
component and determine whether the practical expedient applies.
Topic 606 only provides examples of a significant financing component in
contracts with a single performance obligation; therefore, it was unclear if a
significant financing component could be allocated entirely to one or more, but
not all, performance obligations. The TRG generally agreed that allocating a
significant financing component entirely to one or more performance obligations
may be consistent with the allocation objective in some cases. While no
specific conclusions were reached by the TRG on when this would be
appropriate, the FASB and IASB staffs indicated (in TRG Agenda Paper No 30
from that March 2015 meeting) that the considerations about whether a
significant financing component can be allocated entirely to one or more, but
not all, of the performance obligations in a contract may be similar to those an
entity considers in determining whether variable consideration or a bundled
discount relates to only one or some of the performance obligations in a
contract, but not all.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         479
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                  Question E345
                  Can fixed consideration be allocated to one or
                  more, but not all, distinct goods or services within a
                  series?
Interpretive response: No. Fixed consideration cannot be allocated among the
distinct goods or services within a single performance obligation (a series) using
the variable consideration allocation guidance.
Instead, the fixed consideration allocated to the entire performance obligation is
attributed to the distinct goods or services based on the single measure of
progress (e.g. time-elapsed method, input method) used to determine progress
toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. A measure of
progress might approximate the effect of allocating fixed consideration to
portions of a series. For guidance on measuring progress, see Chapter F –
Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance
obligation.



                   Question E346
                   If a nonrefundable upfront fee relates to a separate
                   performance obligation, should it be allocated
                   entirely to that performance obligation?
Interpretive response: Not necessarily. Even when a nonrefundable upfront
fee relates to a separate performance obligation, the amount of the fee may not
equal the relative stand-alone selling price of that performance obligation.
Therefore, some of the fee could be allocated to other performance obligations
in the contract.
See Question E210 for further discussion on allocating the transaction price to
performance obligations when the sum of stand-alone selling prices in a
contract is less than the total transaction price.



Changes in the transaction price

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Changes in the Transaction Price
32-42 After contract inception, the transaction price can change for various
reasons, including the resolution of uncertain events or other changes in
circumstances that change the amount of consideration to which an entity
expects to be entitled in exchange for the promised goods or services.
32-43 An entity shall allocate to the performance obligations in the contract
any subsequent changes in the transaction price on the same basis as at
contract inception. Consequently, an entity shall not reallocate the transaction




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         480
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



price to reflect changes in standalone selling prices after contract inception.
Amounts allocated to a satisfied performance obligation shall be recognized as
revenue, or as a reduction of revenue, in the period in which the transaction
price changes.
32-44 An entity shall allocate a change in the transaction price entirely to one
or more, but not all, performance obligations or distinct goods or services
promised in a series that forms part of a single performance obligation in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-14(b) only if the criteria in paragraph 606-
10-32-40 on allocating variable consideration are met.
32-45 An entity shall account for a change in the transaction price that arises as
a result of a contract modification in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-10
through 25-13. However, for a change in the transaction price that occurs after
a contract modification, an entity shall apply paragraphs 606-10-32-42 through
32-44 to allocate the change in the transaction price in whichever of the
following ways is applicable:
a. An entity shall allocate the change in the transaction price to the
   performance obligations identified in the contract before the modification
   if, and to the extent that, the change in the transaction price is attributable
   to an amount of variable consideration promised before the modification
   and the modification is accounted for in accordance with paragraph 606-10-
   25-13(a).
b. In all other cases in which the modification was not accounted for as a
   separate contract in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-12, an entity
   shall allocate the change in the transaction price to the performance
   obligations in the modified contract (that is, the performance
   obligations that were unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied immediately after
   the modification).


After contract inception, the transaction price may change for various reasons –
including the resolution of uncertain events or other changes in circumstances
that affect the amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be
entitled. In most cases, these changes are allocated to performance obligations
on the same basis as at contract inception. For example, when using the
relative stand-alone selling price method any change in the transaction price is
similarly allocated on a proportional basis. Similarly, when variable consideration
is allocated entirely to one or more, but not all, performance obligations or
distinct goods or services that comprise a single performance obligation in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-40, any changes in those variable
amounts are allocated to those performance obligations or distinct goods or
services. Any portion of a change in transaction price that is allocated to a
satisfied or partially satisfied performance obligation is recognized as revenue –
or as a reduction in revenue – in the period of the transaction price change.
A change in the transaction price resulting from a contract modification requires
special consideration. When the change in the transaction price is a result of a
modification (i.e. the modification results in a change in the contractual price
promised in the contract), the transaction price is allocated in accordance with
the modification guidance (see Chapter G – Contract modifications). When the
change in transaction price occurs after a contract modification, the change is
allocated to the performance obligations in the modified contract – i.e. those




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         481
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



that were unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied immediately after the modification
– unless the:
— change is attributable to an amount of variable consideration that was
  promised before the modification; and
— the modification was accounted for as a termination of the existing contract
  and creation of a new contract.
How an entity allocates changes in the transaction price after a modification
depends on whether the change is attributable to variable amounts promised
before the modification. That is because a change in the expected amount of
variable consideration and changes in the transaction price arising from a
modification are the results of different economic events. A change in the
expectation of variable consideration relates to a resolution of variable
consideration identified and agreed upon at contract inception, whereas a
change in price arising from a modification is the result of a separate and
subsequent negotiation between the two parties. As such, it may be
appropriate to allocate changes in variable consideration that was promised
before the modification to distinct goods or services that have been satisfied
even if the modification is accounted for on a prospective basis as a termination
of an existing contract and creation of a new contract. [ASU 2014-09.BC82]
The following example in Topic 606 illustrates a scenario where the transaction
price changes after a contract modification.


                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Contract Modifications
• • > Example 6—Change in the Transaction Price after a Contract Modification
55-117 On July 1, 20X0, an entity promises to transfer two distinct products to
a customer. Product X transfers to the customer at contract inception and
Product Y transfers on March 31, 20X1. The consideration promised by the
customer includes fixed consideration of $1,000 and variable consideration that
is estimated to be $200. The entity includes its estimate of variable
consideration in the transaction price because it concludes that it is probable
that a significant reversal in cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when
the uncertainty is resolved.
55-118 The transaction price of $1,200 is allocated equally to the performance
obligation for Product X and the performance obligation for Product Y. This is
because both products have the same standalone selling prices and the
variable consideration does not meet the criteria in paragraph 606-10-32-40 that
requires allocation of the variable consideration to one but not both of the
performance obligations.
55-119 When Product X transfers to the customer at contract inception, the
entity recognizes revenue of $600.
55-120 On November 30, 20X0, the scope of the contract is modified to
include the promise to transfer Product Z (in addition to the undelivered
Product Y) to the customer on June 30, 20X1, and the price of the contract is
increased by $300 (fixed consideration), which does not represent the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         482
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



standalone selling price of Product Z. The standalone selling price of Product Z
is the same as the standalone selling prices of Products X and Y.
55-121 The entity accounts for the modification as if it were the termination of
the existing contract and the creation of a new contract. This is because the
remaining Products Y and Z are distinct from Product X, which had transferred
to the customer before the modification, and the promised consideration for
the additional Product Z does not represent its standalone selling price.
Consequently, in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a), the consideration
to be allocated to the remaining performance obligations comprises the
consideration that had been allocated to the performance obligation for
Product Y (which is measured at an allocated transaction price amount of $600)
and the consideration promised in the modification (fixed consideration of
$300). The transaction price for the modified contract is $900, and that amount
is allocated equally to the performance obligation for Product Y and the
performance obligation for Product Z (that is, $450 is allocated to each
performance obligation).
55-122 After the modification but before the delivery of Products Y and Z, the
entity revises its estimate of the amount of variable consideration to which it
expects to be entitled to $240 (rather than the previous estimate of $200). The
entity concludes that the change in estimate of the variable consideration can
be included in the transaction price because it is probable that a significant
reversal in cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty
is resolved. Even though the modification was accounted for as if it were the
termination of the existing contract and the creation of a new contract in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a), the increase in the transaction
price of $40 is attributable to variable consideration promised before the
modification. Therefore, in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-45, the
change in the transaction price is allocated to the performance obligations for
Product X and Product Y on the same basis as at contract inception.
Consequently, the entity recognizes revenue of $20 for Product X in the period
in which the change in the transaction price occurs. Because Product Y had not
transferred to the customer before the contract modification, the change in
the transaction price that is attributable to Product Y is allocated to the
remaining performance obligations at the time of the contract modification.
This is consistent with the accounting that would have been required by
paragraph 606-10-25-13(a) if that amount of variable consideration had been
estimated and included in the transaction price at the time of the contract
modification.
55-123 The entity also allocates the $20 increase in the transaction price for
the modified contract equally to the performance obligations for Product Y
and Product Z. This is because the products have the same standalone
selling prices and the variable consideration does not meet the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-32-40 that require allocation of the variable consideration to
one but not both of the performance obligations. Consequently, the amount of
the transaction price allocated to the performance obligations for Product Y and
Product Z increases by $10 to $460 each.
55-124 On March 31, 20X1, Product Y is transferred to the customer, and the
entity recognizes revenue of $460. On June 30, 20X1, Product Z is transferred
to the customer, and the entity recognizes revenue of $460.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         483
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question E348
                   When is a change in transaction price accounted for
                   as a contract modification?
Interpretive response: It depends. A contract modification is a change in scope
and/or price that either creates new or changes existing enforceable rights and
obligations. An evaluation of facts and circumstances for the change in price is
required and not all changes in price are contract modifications. This distinction
is important because it affects when the change in price is recognized.
— Resolution of variable transaction price. The resolution of variability in
  the amount of expected consideration are accounted for as a change in
  transaction price and not a contract modification. Examples include the
  achievement of a performance bonus or resolution of an uncertainty that
  existed at contract inception that affects price.
— Price concessions. Pricing variability that is not explicitly stated in a
  contract is not presumed to be the result of a contract modification. It may
  instead be an implied term of the contract that could be inferred from the
  entity’s historical business practices. If an entity has a history of granting
  price concessions or there is evidence of past performance issues or
  payment disputes, the resulting price changes would generally be attributed
  to the initial contract and not be accounted for as a contract modification.
  See Question D130.
— External pressures on price. Changes in market conditions, technological
  advances or competition in the marketplace could also cause an entity to
  change its pricing under an existing contract. When these types of changes
  are inconsistent with an entity’s past practice, not anticipated at inception
  of the contract and are unrelated to performance issues, they would be
  accounted for as a contract modification.
For guidance on the accounting for contract modifications, see Chapter G –
Contract modifications.



Material rights

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Customer Options for Additional Goods or Services
55-44 Paragraph 606-10-32-29 requires an entity to allocate the transaction
price to performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. If
the standalone selling price for a customer’s option to acquire additional goods
or services is not directly observable, an entity should estimate it. That
estimate should reflect the discount that the customer would obtain when
exercising the option, adjusted for both of the following:
a. Any discount that the customer could receive without exercising the option
b. The likelihood that the option will be exercised.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         484
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



55-45 If a customer has a material right to acquire future goods or services and
those goods or services are similar to the original goods or services in the
contract and are provided in accordance with the terms of the original contract,
then an entity may, as a practical alternative to estimating the standalone
selling price of the option, allocate the transaction price to the optional goods
or services by reference to the goods or services expected to be provided and
the corresponding expected consideration. Typically, those types of options are
for contract renewals.


If a customer option to acquire additional goods or services represents a
material right, an entity is required to estimate the stand-alone selling price of
the option and allocate the transaction price on a relative stand-alone selling
price basis to each performance obligation in the contract, which includes the
material right. See Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in
the contract for a discussion of material rights.
The stand-alone selling price of an option may be directly observable, and if that
is the case the directly observable price should be used. If the stand-alone
selling price is not directly observable, then an entity will need to estimate the
stand-alone selling price of the material right.
Option pricing models generally take into account the intrinsic value and time
value of the option. However, an entity is only required to estimate the intrinsic
value of an option because the benefits of including the time value component
would not justify the costs of making the estimate. [ASU 2014-09.BC390]
In estimating the stand-alone selling price of the material right an entity starts
with the discount the customer would obtain when exercising the option and
adjusts for:
— any discount that the customer would receive without exercising the
  option; and
— the likelihood that the option will be exercised.
The stand-alone selling price of the material right only includes the incremental
discount provided through the current purchase. For example, if a contract with
a customer included a material right that consisted of an option to purchase
future goods or services at a 50% discount but the entity was also offering a
10% discount on the same products to all customers, the estimate of the
stand-alone selling price would only consider the 40% discount that is
incremental to what the customer could otherwise receive.
The guidance also specifies that the stand-alone selling price is adjusted for the
likelihood that the option will be exercised. In effect, the stand-alone selling price of
a material right includes estimated breakage. For example, if as part of a current
purchase an entity provided the customer with an option to purchase an item at
$50 that is normally sold for $100 (a 50% discount) the entity would start with the
$50 discount and adjust for the probability of redemption. If the entity estimated
that 80% of similar customer options are redeemed, the stand-alone selling price of
the option would be $40 ($50 discount × 80% probability of exercise).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         485
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question E349
                   Should an entity revise the stand-alone selling price
                   of a material right if the entity’s estimate of the
                   likelihood of exercise changes?
Interpretive response: No, unless the alternative approach is used. The stand-
alone selling price of performance obligations in a contract is not adjusted after
contract inception even if the assumptions change. This is also true for the
stand-alone selling price of material rights. To determine the stand-alone selling
price of a material right, an entity estimates the likelihood that the customer will
exercise the option at contract inception and that initial estimate is not revised.
However, the estimates of the stand-alone selling price of a similar option in
subsequent contracts may be affected by those changes in estimates.
[606-10-32-43]

As a consequence, a customer’s decision to exercise an option or allow the
option to expire affects the timing of recognition for the material right, but it
does not result in reallocation of the transaction price.
The exception is when an entity applies the alternative approach to estimating
stand-alone selling price of an option. When an entity applies the alternative
approach, any changes in the number of options exercised result in an
adjustment to the transaction price and revenue recognized in accordance with
Example 51 in Topic 606. [606-10-55-352]
We believe it is acceptable to adjust the number of expected goods or services
on either a cumulative catch-up or prospective basis. However, an entity should
establish a policy for the approach it uses and apply it consistently. See
Example E370.1.


Alternative approach
Topic 606 provides an alternative approach to estimating the stand-alone selling
price of a customer option when certain criteria are met. This alternative
typically applies when a renewal option is considered a material right. Under
this alternative, the entity would allocate the transaction price to the optional
goods or services by reference to the goods or services it expects to provide
and the corresponding consideration expected to be received. It could be easier
to view a contract with renewal options as a contract for its expected term
rather than estimating the stand-alone selling prices for each renewal. This is
because estimating each renewal would require separately calculating the
stand-alone selling price for each good or service and the likelihood that the
customers will renew in each subsequent period. [ASU 2014-09.BC393]
This alternative can be applied when two criteria are met:
— the material right relates to goods or services that are similar to the original
  goods or services in the contract; and
— those goods or services are provided in accordance of the term of the
  original contract.
The first criterion specifies that the additional goods or services are similar to
those provided under the initial contract. In other words, the entity is continuing




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         486
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



to provide what it was already providing. For example, the alternative would
typically apply to renewals of services provided in the original contract (e.g.
renewals of PCS).
The second criterion specifies that the subsequent contracts must be provided
in accordance with the terms of the original contract. In other words, the option
price and goods or services the customer can acquire when exercising the
option are fixed in the original contract. This criterion distinguishes between
other types of options such as loyalty points or certain discount vouchers
because, contrary to loyalty points or discount vouchers, the entity cannot
change the pricing of the additional goods or services beyond the pricing in the
original contract. [ASU 2014-09.BC395]




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Topic 606 requires an entity to establish a stand-alone selling price for a customer
option that provides the customer with a material right. This is not a requirement
under legacy US GAAP. There were two approaches applied in practice to
accounting for a significant incremental discount under legacy US GAAP.
— General multiple element accounting guidance: An entity was permitted
  to account for the option as a separate deliverable under general multiple
  element accounting guidance. This practice was similar to the accounting
  required under Topic 606.
— Software revenue recognition guidance: Although this guidance applied
  specifically to software arrangements (i.e. it was included within
  Subtopic 985-605), it was sometimes analogized to in the accounting for
  significant incremental discounts in non-software arrangements. This
  approach generally resulted in accounting that was different from that
  required by Topic 606 and typically resulted in a greater amount allocated to
  the future discount than the approach under Topic 606.
Under the legacy US GAAP software guidance, if an arrangement included a
right to a significant incremental discount on a customer’s future purchase of
products (e.g. additional software licenses) or services, then a proportionate
amount of that significant incremental discount was applied to each element
based on its fair value (selling price) without regard to the significant
incremental discount. For example, a 35% discount on future purchases would
result in each element in the arrangement being recognized at a 35% discount
to its fair value (selling price). This approach did not require an estimate of the
selling price for that customer option. This is different from Topic 606’s
requirement to establish either an observable or estimated stand-alone selling
price for a customer option that provides the customer with a material right.
Under legacy US GAAP, if the products to which the discount applied were not
specified, or the fair value of the future purchases could not be determined but
the maximum discount was quantifiable, the discount was allocated to the
elements assuming that the customer would purchase the minimum amount
necessary to receive the maximum discount. This legacy approach is different
from Topic 606’s guidance on estimating the stand-alone selling price of an




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         487
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



option, which inherently includes an estimate of breakage (which typically will
not be zero).
Lastly, under legacy US GAAP, if the discount was unlimited in a software
arrangement (i.e. a customer could hypothetically buy an infinite amount of
additional software licenses at a significant incremental discount), then revenue
would be recognized under the subscription accounting model. The subscription
model does not allocate revenue, but instead revenue is recognized ratably over
the term or estimated term of the arrangement. This approach is different from
Topic 606’s allocation requirements. A similar option granted under Topic 606
would still be assigned an estimated stand-alone selling price and some portion
of the arrangement consideration would be allocated to all performance
obligations in the contract. As a consequence, if any performance obligations
are satisfied upon contract inception (i.e. delivery of a software license), some
portion of the arrangement consideration will be recognized immediately.
The Topic 606 guidance applicable to accounting for material rights will likely
require entities to make additional estimates than under legacy US GAAP,
which included more situations in which an entity would not have to estimate
the selling price of a customer option. Entities will generally need to establish
internal processes to make the new estimates for customer options and
controls to ensure such estimates are reasonable and appropriate.
See Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract for
differences in identifying material rights compared to significant incremental
discounts.



                  Question E350
                  In order to apply the alternative approach, does the
                  outcome have to be the same as estimating the
                  stand-alone selling price for each option?
Interpretive response: No. The alternative approach may result in a different
accounting outcome. Depending on the individual facts and circumstances the
difference could result in more or less of the transaction price being deferred
and recognized as the options are exercised.
Regardless of the approach an entity selects, it should apply that approach
consistently to similar circumstances.



                   Question E355
                   Is the alternative approach limited to renewals of
                   services?
Interpretive response: No. The FASB discussed the concept of the practical
alternative only in terms of service renewals. However, we believe this
alternative can be applied to a material right for the purchase of additional goods
– assuming the material right relates to goods that are similar to the original




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         488
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



goods in the contract and are provided in accordance with the terms of the
original contract. [606-10-55-45]



                  Question E360
                  When an option to renew a good or service
                  provides a material right, can an entity apply the
                  alternative approach to allocating the transaction
                  price when there are other goods or services in the
                  initial contract?
Interpretive response: Yes. We believe that the entity does not need to have
the option to renew all of the goods or services in the original contract in order
to qualify for the alternative method.
For example, a software entity often sells a perpetual license and PCS with
contractually stated renewal options for PCS. When the option to renew PCS is
determined to be a material right – e.g. the renewal price for the PCS is lower
than the price for the same PCS the entity offers to similarly situated
customers that have not entered into a contract with the entity previously -- the
software entity needs to account for the material right as a separate
performance obligation.
A software entity providing a license and PCS with contractually stated renewal
options will generally qualify for the alternative method. That is because the
option provides the customer the ability to purchase a service similar to a
service provided in the original contract and the contract explicitly states the
terms of the renewal.



                  Question E370
                  If an entity applies the alternative approach of
                  allocating the transaction price to a material right,
                  how should the entity determine the amount of
                  goods or services expected to be provided?
Interpretive response: The alternative approach to estimating the stand-alone
selling price of an option allows an entity to allocate the transaction price to the
optional goods or services by reference to the goods or services expected to be
provided and the corresponding expected consideration. However, Topic 606
does not provide detailed guidance on how to determine what are the expected
goods or services. We believe an entity can determine the amount of expected
goods or services either by using a portfolio of data approach or on a contract-
by-contract basis.
For example, an entity may enter into a contract to sell a software license and
one year of PCS with two contractually stated annual renewal options for the
PCS. When the option to renew the PCS provides the customer with a material
right, the entity typically will be able to either directly estimate the stand-alone
selling price of the options or apply the alternative method.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         489
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Portfolio of data approach
Example 51 in Topic 606 (paragraphs 606-10-55-343 through 55-352) illustrates
the application of the alternative approach to a service arrangement whereby
the entity estimates the number of contracts expected to be renewed for a
portfolio of contracts. In that example, the entity enters into 100 similar annual
contracts with two renewal periods around the same time. The entity estimates
the number of expected renewals for the portfolio to estimate the transaction
price and to allocate consideration to the initial and renewal contracts.
Paragraph 606-10-55-352 states that if the actual number of contract renewals
were different than what the entity expected, the entity would update the
transaction price and revenue recognized accordingly. We believe it is
acceptable to adjust the number of expected goods or services during the
period(s) for which a material right exists, on either a cumulative catch-up or
prospective basis as long as the entity establishes a policy for the approach it
uses and applies it consistently.
Based on Example 51, a similar approach would be acceptable whereby the
entity estimates the number of goods or services expected to be provided
based on historical data for a portfolio of similar transactions..
Contract-by-contract basis
When an entity estimates the expected goods or services on a contract-by-
contract basis, the entity should consider each option that provides the
customer with a material right to be a ‘good or service that is expected to be
provided’ unless the entity expects the customer’s right to expire unexercised
(e.g. it would be likely that the right will expire unexercised). To determine
whether an entity expects the customer’s right to expire unexercised the entity
should consider the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through 32-13 on
constraining estimates of variable consideration (see Chapter D – Step 3:
Determine the transaction price).
The approach outlined in the preceding paragraph is consistent with the
guidance on ‘breakage’ in Topic 606 (paragraphs 606-10-55-46 through 55-49)
and ensures that the entity’s obligation to provide future goods or services is
not understated by allocating an appropriate amount of consideration to the
material right. We believe the analogy to breakage is appropriate because the
alternative method factors in breakage based on the number of goods or
services included in the contract rather than in estimating the stand-alone
selling price of the option.
Further, we believe that under this alternative, the estimate of the expected
consideration would not need to be further adjusted for the likelihood of
exercise. This is because breakage is already considered in determining the
expected goods or services to be provided and breakage (by analogy, as noted
above) is not a form of variable consideration that affects the transaction price.
However, to determine the expected goods or services to be provided, the
entity considers the principles used in the guidance on constraining estimates
of variable consideration. [606-10-55-48].
See Approach 2 in Example E370.1 for an illustration of how to determine and
subsequently allocate the expected consideration to the goods or services
expected to be provided when applying this alternative.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          490
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



If the actual number of contract renewals is different from what the entity
expected, the entity updates the transaction price and revenue recognized
accordingly. We believe it is acceptable to adjust the number of expected goods
or services during the period(s) for which a material right exists on either a
cumulative catch-up or prospective basis as long as the entity applies it
consistently. If a renewal option is not exercised, any remaining revenue is
recognized when the material right expires unexercised.
Under a contract-by-contract approach, we believe it is also acceptable to
include all of the options that represent a material right in the expected
consideration and then estimate the expected consideration based on the
likelihood of exercise similar to Example 51 in Topic 606. For example, if an
entity includes a renewal option with a contract price of $100 that has a 60%
probability of being exercised, it could include $60 in the expected
consideration.



                  Example E370.1
                  Estimating stand-alone selling price – material rights
Software Vendor M (M) enters into 100 contracts to provide a perpetual license
for $10,000 and one year of PCS for $2,000, both of which are equal to their
stand-alone selling price. Each contract provides Customer the option to renew
the annual PCS for $1,000 for two additional years. M concludes that the
license and the PCS are separate performance obligations.
M also concludes that each renewal option provides a material right to
Customer that it would not receive without entering into the contract because
the discount is significant to what the entity charges other similarly situated
customers.
Topic 606 allows two approaches to allocate the transaction price to renewal
options. The following illustrates the allocation of the transaction price to the
material right under both approaches.
Approach 1: Estimate the stand-alone selling price of each option
Under Approach 1, M estimates the stand-alone selling price of each
performance obligation and the two material rights in the contract. To estimate
the stand-alone selling price of each material right, M calculates the discount
the Customer would receive from exercising the option adjusted for the
probability of renewal.
M expects 90 customers to renew at the end of Year 1 (90% of contracts sold)
and 81 customers to renew at the end of Year 2 (90% of the 90 customers that
renewed at the end of Year 1).
M estimates the stand-alone selling price for each material right as follows.

                                                                       Probability of             Stand-alone selling
 Option                                       Discount                      renewal                            price
 Renewal Option 1                                 $1,000                             90%                                  $900
 Renewal Option 2                                 $1,000                             81%                                  $810




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                           491
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



M then allocates the transaction price on a relative stand-alone selling price
basis as follows.

 Performance                             Stand-alone                                                           Allocated
 obligation                              selling price                   Allocation %                      consideration
 Perpetual license                              $10,000                            73.0%                             $ 8,760
 PCS Year 1                                         2,000                          14.5%                                 1,740
 Material right –
 renewal Option 1                                      900                           6.5%                                   780
 Material right –
 renewal Option 2                                      810                           6.0%                                   720
 Total                                          $13,710                          100.0%                              $12,000


In Year 1, M would recognize $8,760 when it transfers control of the license
and $1,740 as the entity satisfies the PCS performance obligation. The
difference between the amounts recognized as revenue and the consideration
received of $1,500 ($12,000 – $8,760 – $1,740) would be recognized as a
contract liability.
When the customer exercises Option 1, the entity would recognize $1,780
($1,000 additional consideration plus $780 allocated to Option 1) as the entity
satisfies its performance obligation under the renewal contract. When the
customer exercises Option 2, the entity would recognize $1,720 ($1,000
additional consideration plus $720 allocated to Option 2).
If the customer does not exercise its option, M would recognize as revenue the
amounts allocated to all remaining options.
Approach 2: Apply the alternative approach
If M applies the alternative method, it would allocate the transaction price by
reference to the goods or services expected to be provided and corresponding
expected consideration. To apply the alternative method, Entity M could either
estimate the transaction price based on a portfolio or on a contract by contract
basis.
Portfolio of data
M would estimate the total number of expected goods or services for the
100 contracts based on expectations for similar customers. M estimates the
number of renewals and corresponding expected transaction price. M also
concludes that the stand-alone selling price for each PCS period is the same.
Based on the entity’s estimates, the transaction price is allocated to each
performance obligation as follows.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          492
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                                                                              Stand-
                                                                               alone
                                                                              selling
 Perform-                                                 Expected              price
 ance                 Contract          Expected          consider-         expected           Allocation            Relative
 obligation              price          renewals             ation            goods                     %          allocation

 Perpetual
 license               $10,000                   n/a        $10,000           $10,000               65.0%            $ 8,911
 PCS
 Year 1                    2,000                 n/a           2,000              2,000             13.0%                1,782
 Renewal
 Option 1                  1,000              90%                 900             1,800             11.5%                1,577
 Renewal
 Option 2                  1,000              81%                 810             1,620             10.5%                1,440
 Total                 $14,000                              $13,710           $15,420              100.0%            $13,710


In Year 1, M would recognize $891,100 (100 contracts × $8,911) when it
transfers control of the license and $178,200 (100 contracts × $1,782) as the
entity satisfies the PCS performance obligation. The difference between the
amounts recognized and amounts received of $130,700 ($1,200,000 – $891,100
– $178,200) would be recognized as a contract liability. The amounts allocated
to subsequent years would be recognized as the performance obligations are
satisfied.
If the actual number of renewals is different from what was expected, M’s
policy is to update the transaction price and recognize revenue with a
cumulative catch-up adjustment. For example, if 95 customers exercise the first
renewal option, M would update the transaction price and reallocate the
consideration to each performance obligation. The expected consideration
would be adjusted as follows.
                                                                              Stand-
                                                                               alone
                                                                              selling
 Perform-                                                 Expected              price
 ance                 Contract          Expected          consider-         expected           Allocation            Relative
 obligation              price          renewals             ation            goods                     %          allocation

 Perpetual
 license               $10,000                   n/a        $10,000           $10,000               64.0%            $ 8,835
 PCS
 Year 1                    2,000                 n/a           2,000              2,000             12.8%                1,767
 Renewal
 Option 1                  1,000              95%                 950             1,900             12.2%                1,685
 Renewal
 Option 2                  1,000            85.5%                 855             1,710             11.0%                1,518
 Total                 $14,000                              $13,805           $15,610              100.0%            $13,805

At the beginning of Year 2, M would record an adjustment to reverse revenue
allocated to the license and PCS Year 1 of $9,100 [($8,835 + $1,767) –
($8,911+$1,782) × 100 contracts]. M would recognize $168,500 ($1,685 ×




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          493
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



100 contracts) as it satisfies the PCS during the first renewal option period. At
the end of Year 2, M would have a contract liability of $66,300 [$1,295,000 of
total consideration received – $1,228,700 of revenue recognized]. In Year 3, if
there is no change in expected renewals the entity would recognize $151,800
of revenue ($66,300 contract liability + $85,500 remaining consideration
received).
Contract-by-contract basis
If M applies the alternative method on a contract-by-contract approach, M must
estimate the goods or services it expects to provide and corresponding
expected consideration. M has a material right for both Option 1 and Option 2
and does not expect the rights to go unexercised. M considered the factors in
paragraph 606-10-32-12 when determining whether either of the rights would
go unexercised and noted that:
— the exercise is out of the entity’s control;
— the uncertainty will not be resolved for a long period of time;
— while M has experience with similar customers and has data that suggests
  there will be some breakage, the historical evidence indicates that on a
  customer-by- customer basis that it would not expect either of the options
  to expire unexercised.

                                                                           Stand-
                                                                            alone
                                                                           selling
 Perform-                                                                   price
 ance                     Contract              Expected                 expected           Allocation              Relative
 obligation                  price          consideration                  goods                     %            allocation
 Perpetual
 license                    $10,000                  $10,000               $10,000                62.5%              $ 8,750
 PCS
 Year 1                        2,000                     2,000                 2,000              12.5%                  1,750
 Renewal
 Option 1                      1,000                     1,000                 2,000               12.5%                 1,750
 Renewal
 Option 2                      1,000                     1,000                 2,000               12.5%                 1,750
 Total                      $14,000                  $14,000               $16,000               100.0%              $14,000


In Year 1, M would recognize $8,750 when it transfers control of the license
and $1,750 as it satisfies the PCS performance obligation. The difference
between the amounts recognized as revenue and consideration received of
$1,500 ($12,000 – $8,750 – $1,750) would be recognized as a contract liability.
The amounts allocated to subsequent years would be recognized as the
performance obligations are satisfied.
If the customer does not exercise its option, M would recognize as revenue the
amounts allocated to all remaining options.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         494
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                   Question E380
                   When an upfront fee gives rise to a material right,
                   but the renewal price is not specified in the initial
                   contract, can the alternative approach be applied?
Interpretive response: Generally, yes. One of the criteria to apply the
alternative approach is that the optional goods or services are provided in
accordance with the terms of the original contract. Sometimes an entity may
provide the customer with an option to renew at a price negotiated at the time
of the renewal, or at the then market rate, or the contract may be silent on
renewals but there is a reasonable expectation by the customer that it has the
right to renew the service.
When a renewal option or price is not specified in the original contract, we
believe the alternative approach can be applied if a nonrefundable upfront fee
conveys a material right and the entity’s past practice creates a reasonable
expectation that the customer:
— will avoid paying an upfront fee on renewal; and
— will pay a renewal price consistent with renewal pricing given to a similar
  class of customer.
However, the optional good or service expected to be provided needs to be
similar to the good or service in the original contract.
We believe this conclusion is consistent with the FASB’s intent. This is because
the criteria to apply the alternative approach are intended to distinguish
between renewal options and other types of material rights such as loyalty
points and discount vouchers. The criterion that requires additional goods and
services to be provided under the original contract’s terms makes this
distinction for loyalty points and discount vouchers. Because an entity can
change the pricing of the additional goods or services under those programs
beyond the parameters specified in the original contract, the alternative
approach cannot be applied in those scenarios. For example, an airline can
change the number of points that must be redeemed to obtain a flight, thereby
changing the discount (e.g. the value of the points) that was given in the original
contract. [ASU 2014-09.BC394–BC395]
Although an entity could change the price of the renewals in the renewal option
scenario, we believe the contract terms that convey the material right (i.e. the
upfront fee) should be the terms that are evaluated under this criterion. If the
customer has a reasonable expectation that it will avoid an additional upfront
fee when the contract is renewed, the terms that create the material right are
implied in the original contract. In contrast, the discount provided in a voucher
or loyalty point scenario is determined at the time the option is exercised.



                   Example E380.1
                   Nonrefundable upfront fees – alternative approach
Customer enters into a one-year service contract with SAAS Corp. The terms of
the contract require Customer to pay a fixed monthly fee of $100, plus a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         495
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



nonrefundable upfront fee of $4,000. The contract does not specify a renewal
option or pricing, but SAAS Corp has a history of renewing these types of
contracts at prices consistent with similar customers without requiring payment
of the upfront fee again on renewal.
The nonrefundable upfront fee relates to set-up activities and not a promised
good or service. SAAS Corp concludes that the upfront fee gives rise to a
material right because Customer would not have to pay the upfront fee if the
service is renewed at the end of the one-year term.
SAAS Corp also concludes that the alternative approach can be applied to
estimate the stand-alone selling price of the renewal option. This is because the
renewal services will be substantially the same as the services provided under
the original contract and the renewal price will be determined consistent with
the renewal pricing given to similar customers.



                   Question E390
                   How should an entity determine the expected
                   goods or services under the alternative approach
                   when an upfront fee gives rise to a material right?
Interpretive response: When a contract includes an upfront fee that conveys a
material right, an entity has two potential approaches to allocate consideration
to the material right:
— determine the stand-alone selling price of the right and allocate based on a
  relative stand-alone selling price basis; or
— the alternative approach, which allocates the transaction price to the
  optional goods or services it expects to provide by reference to those
  expected goods or services and the corresponding expected consideration.
If an entity qualifies for and elects to apply the alternative approach, it estimates
the goods or services it expects to provide and the corresponding consideration
it expects to receive. However, Topic 606 does not provide detailed guidance
on how to make this determination. As discussed in Question E370, we believe
that entities can apply a method based on a portfolio of data or a method based
on an individual contract.
We believe the following are acceptable methods for applying the alternative
approach when an upfront fee conveys a material right. Under any of these
methods, the expected goods or services are limited to the period a material
right exists. See Question C410 for guidance on determining the period the
material right exists.
Method 1: Portfolio of data incorporating estimates of breakage with
adjustments for changes in estimate
Method 1 is similar to Example 51 in Topic 606 whereby the entity estimates
the expected renewals and corresponding expected consideration for a portfolio
of similar contracts.
Under this method, an entity estimates breakage using the portfolio of data. For
example, if the portfolio comprises 100 contracts and there is a material right




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         496
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



for a single renewal period, the entity estimates how many of the 100 contracts
will be renewed. The entity then allocates the expected consideration between
the original contract and expected renewals.
If the actual renewals are different from the original estimate, the entity adjusts
the number of expected goods or services, transaction price and revenue
recognized. See Example E370.1. [606-10-55-352]
Based on discussions with the FASB staff, we believe it is acceptable to adjust
the number of expected goods or services on a cumulative catch-up or
prospective basis.
Method 2: Amortization of upfront fee over weighted-average expected
renewal period
Under Method 2, an entity amortizes the upfront fee over the period of
expected renewals in a pattern consistent with the measure of progress for that
performance obligation. This method allocates the consideration to the
expected renewal periods rather than to the expected goods or services.
Method 2 takes into account a portfolio of data similar to Method 1; however,
this method sets a weighted-average amortization period for the upfront fee
rather than calculating a specific number of renewals each period. Both
Methods 1 and 2 incorporate an estimate of breakage.
This method differs from Method 1 because an entity does not track actual
versus estimated renewals for a particular portfolio (e.g. contracts entered into
in a single month/quarter) and make an adjustment to true up to actual
renewals. The monitoring of the renewal experience is done at a higher level.
An entity monitors its weighted-average expected renewal period for similar
customers and updates the revenue recognized for the change in estimate
using either a cumulative catch-up or prospective adjustment.
However, we believe an approach where an entity establishes an amortization
period with no monitoring for subsequent changes in actual results would not
be appropriate.
Method 3: Contract-by-contract approach
Under Method 3, an entity includes the expected goods or services and
corresponding consideration for a specific contract rather than calculating
breakage using a portfolio of contracts. We believe this method is consistent
with the FASB’s intent for the alternative approach to allow entities to avoid the
complex calculations needed to estimate the likelihood of a series of renewal
periods. [ASU 2014-09.BC392–BC393]
Under this method, the entity includes each option that provides the customer
with a material right in the contract to be a ‘good or service that is expected to
be provided’ unless it expects the right to expire unexercised – e.g. it is likely
that the right will expire unexercised.
If the actual renewals are different from the original estimate, the entity adjusts
the number of expected goods or services using either a cumulative catch-up or
prospective adjustment. In the event a renewal option is not exercised, any
remaining contract liability is recognized as revenue. This method requires an
entity to monitor each of its contracts separately to make an adjustment based
on actual renewals.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          497
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



Example E390.1 further illustrates these methods when applying the alternative
approach.



                   Example E390.1
                   Estimating stand-alone selling price in a contract
                   with an upfront fee that gives rise to a material right
                   – comprehensive example
SAAS Corp enters into a one-year SAAS service contract with Customer for a
fixed fee of $4,000, which is billed upfront. In addition, SAAS Corp charges a
one-time nonrefundable upfront fee of $1,000. Customer can renew the service
for 10 annual time increments at a rate of $4,000 per year.
SAAS Corp concludes that the nonrefundable upfront fee relates to set-up
activities that do not result in the transfer of goods or services to Customer.
Further, SAAS Corp concludes that the upfront fee gives rise to a material right
because it is significant and Customer would not have to pay another upfront
fee upon renewal.
SAAS Corp considers various data points to determine the period over which
the entity has a material right (see Question C410). Those data points include
the average customer life, the significance of the upfront fee and other
qualitative factors to determine the period Customer benefits from not having
to pay the upfront fee (i.e. the number of periods not having to pay the upfront
fee influences Customer’s renewal decision). Based on this analysis, SAAS
Corp concludes that Customer only has a material right for two renewal periods.
SAAS Corp also concludes that the services are satisfied over time and a time-
elapsed measure of progress is appropriate.
SAAS Corp considers the various methods of allocating the transaction price to
the performance obligations -- one year of service and two material rights.
Approach 1: Estimate the stand-alone selling price of each option
To estimate the stand-alone selling price of each material right, SAAS Corp
calculates the discount Customer would receive from exercising the option
adjusted for the probability of renewal. SAAS Corp concludes the discount is
$1,000, which is the nonrefundable upfront fee that would not need to be paid
upon exercising renewal option 1 and renewal option 2.
SAAS Corp expects 85% of customers to renew at the end of Year 1 and 72%
of the original customers to renew at the end of Year 2 (i.e. 85% of the
customers that renewed in Year 1 will renew in Year 2 (85% × 85% = 72%)).
SAAS Corp estimates the stand-alone selling price for each material right as
follows.

                                                                                  Probability of              Stand-alone
 Option                                                        Discount                renewal                selling price
 Renewal option 1                                                 $1,000                        85%                       $850
 Renewal option 2                                                 $1,000                        72%                       $720




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                           498
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



SAAS Corp then allocates the transaction price on a relative stand-alone selling
price basis as follows.

                                                         Stand-alone               Selling price                       Price
  Performance obligation                                 selling price                     ratio                  allocation
  Service contract Year 1                                         $5,000                     76.1%                     $3,805
  Material right – renewal option 1                                    850                   12.9%                          645
  Material right – renewal option 2                                    720                   11.0%                          550
  Total                                                           $6,570                      100%                     $5,000

SAAS Corp records the following journal entries, assuming that Customer
exercises the renewal options.

                                                                                              Debit                     Credit
  Cash/trade receivables                                                                      5,000
  Contract liability                                                                                                     5,000
  To recognize a contract liability when upfront
  billing occurs at beginning of Year 1.
  Contract liability                                                                          3,805
  Revenue                                                                                                                3,805
  To recognize revenue ratably as service contract
  performance obligation is satisfied over Year 1.
  Cash/trade receivables                                                                      4,000
  Contract liability                                                                                                     4,000
  To recognize a contract liability when upfront
  billing occurs at beginning of Year 2.
  Contract liability                                                                          4,645
  Revenue                                                                                                                4,645
  To recognize revenue ratably after renewal
  option 1 is exercised and service performance
  obligation satisfied over Year 2.
  Cash/trade receivables                                                                      4,000
  Contract liability                                                                                                     4,000
  To recognize a contract liability when upfront
  billing occurs at beginning of Year 3.
  Contract liability                                                                          4,550
  Revenue                                                                                                                4,550
  To recognize revenue ratably after renewal
  option 2 is exercised and service performance
  obligation satisfied over Year 3.

If Customer does not exercise an option, SAAS Corp recognizes as revenue the
amounts allocated to all remaining options.
Note: There may be other methods to estimate the stand-alone selling price of
a material right as long as they are consistent with the allocation objective and



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          499
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



material rights guidance. We believe the above illustrates an acceptable
approach.

Approach 2: Apply the alternative approach

Method 1: Portfolio of data incorporating estimates of breakage
Based on its estimates of expected renewals for a portfolio of contracts, SAAS
Corp allocates the transaction price to each performance obligation as follows.
                                                                                     Stand-
                                                                                      alone          Selling
  Performance            Contract         Expected             Expected              selling           price            Price
  obligation                price         renewals         consideration              price            ratio       allocation

  Service
  contract
  Year 1                 $ 5,0001                 n/a             $ 5,000         $ 5,000            38.9%           $ 4,388
  Renewal
  option 1                   4,000              85%                  3,4002           4,2504         33.1%               3,734
  Renewal
  option 2                   4,000              72%                  2,8803           3,6005         28.0%               3,158
  Total                  $13,000                                  $11,280         $12,850              100%          $11,280
  Notes:
  1. Calculated as $4,000 + 1,000
  2.    Calculated as $4,000 × 85%
  3.    Calculated as $4,000 × 72%
  4.    Calculated as $5,000 × 85%
  5.    Calculated as $5,000 × 72%


In Year 1, SAAS Corp recognizes $4,388 as it satisfies the related service
performance obligation. The difference between the amount recognized as
revenue and consideration received of $612 ($5,000 – $4,388) is recognized as
a contract liability.
If at the beginning of the first renewal period the actual number of renewals are
different, SAAS Corp updates the transaction price and revenue recognized
accordingly through either a cumulative catch-up or prospective adjustment
approach, pursuant to paragraph 606-10-55-32.
For example, if 95% of customers exercise their renewal option upon
completion of the one-year service contract, SAAS Corp updates the transaction
price and reallocates the consideration to each performance obligation as
follows.
Cumulative catch-up adjustment approach
                                                                                       Stand-
                                                                                        alone       Selling
  Performance             Contract        Expected              Expected               selling        price             Price
  obligation                 price        renewals          consideration               price         ratio        allocation

  Service
  contract
  Year 1                  $ 5,0001                 n/a             $ 5,000          $ 5,000         35.7%            $ 4,356




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                               500
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                                                                                       Stand-
                                                                                        alone       Selling
  Performance             Contract        Expected              Expected               selling        price             Price
  obligation                 price        renewals          consideration               price         ratio        allocation

  Renewal
  option 1                   4,000              95%                   3,8002            4,7504 33.9%                     4,136
  Renewal
  option 2                   4,000              85%6                  3,4003            4,2505 30.4%                     3,708
  Total                   $13,000                                  $12,200          $14,000           100%           $12,200
  Notes:
  1. Calculated as $4,000 + 1,000
  2.    Calculated as $4,000 × 95%
  3.    Calculated as $4,000 × 85%
  4.    Calculated as $5,000 × 95%
  5.    Calculated as $5,000 × 85%
  6.    Assume SAAS Corp’s updated estimate of expected renewals for Option 2 is
        now 85%


Under the cumulative catch-up adjustment approach, SAAS Corp records the
following journal entry at the beginning of Year 2 to take into account the
change in expectation.

                                                                                               Debit                    Credit
 Revenue                                                                                          321
 Contract liability                                                                                                             32
 To reverse revenue from Year 1 at the start of
 Year 2, based on adjustment to allocation of
 consideration.
 Note:
 1.     Calculated as $4,388 – $4,356.

Prospective adjustment approach
Under a prospective adjustment approach, SAAS Corp does not adjust the
contract liability when the estimate changes but updates the allocation on a
prospective basis as follows.
                                                                                       Stand-
                                                               Remaining                alone       Selling
  Performance             Contract        Expected              expected               selling        price             Price
  obligation                 price        renewals          consideration               price         ratio        allocation

  Service
  contract
  Year 1                  $ 5,0001                 n/a                    n/a               n/a          n/a                    n/a
  Renewal
  option 1                   4,000              95%                  $3,8002          $4,7504 52.8%                    $4,125
  Renewal
  option 2                   4,000              85%                   3,4003           4,2505 47.2%                      3,687




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          501
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract




                                                                                       Stand-
                                                               Remaining                alone         Selling
  Performance             Contract        Expected              expected               selling          price           Price
  obligation                 price        renewals          consideration               price           ratio      allocation

  Contract
  liability                      n/a               n/a                   6126               n/a          n/a
  Total                   $13,000                                    $7,812           $9,000          100%             $7,812
  Notes:
  1. Calculated as $4,000 + 1,000
  2.    Calculated as $4,000 × 95%
  3.    Calculated as $4,000 × 85%
  4.    Calculated as $5,000 × 95%
  5.    Calculated as $5,000 × 85%
  6.    Contract liability after Year 1

SAAS Corp records the following journal entry as it satisfies the related service
performance obligation in Year 2, which takes into account the change in
estimate.

                                                                                               Debit                    Credit
 Cash/trade receivables                                                                        3,800
 Contract liability                                                                               325
 Revenue                                                                                                                 4,125
 To recognize revenue as the related service
 performance obligation is satisfied in Year 2, while
 adjusting for the change in estimate for renewals.


At the end of year 2 the contract liability is $287 ($612 – $325).
Method 2: Amortization over a weighted-average expected renewal period
Assume SAAS Corp determines that the weighted-average expected renewal
period for similar customers is 30 months. For an individual customer that
exercises all its options, SAAS Corp calculates revenue to be recognized as
follows.
                                               Actual service
  Performance                                    revenue per                                                      Revenue
  obligation                                        contract                    Upfront fee                     recognized
  Service Year 1                                         $ 4,000                        $ 4001                       $ 4,400
                                                                                                  1
  Renewal option 1                                           4,000                           400                         4,400
                                                                                                  2
  Renewal option 2                                           4,000                           200                         4,200
  Total                                                  $12,000                        $1,000                       $13,000
  Notes:
  1.    Calculated as ($1,000 / 30 months) × 12 months
  2.    Calculated as ($1,000 / 30 months) × 6




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                          502
  E. Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract



In Year 1, SAAS Corp recognizes $4,400 as it satisfies the related service
performance obligation. The difference between the amount recognized as
revenue and consideration received of $600 ($5,000 – $4,400) is recognized as
a contract liability.
SAAS Corp monitors its weighted-average expected renewal period for similar
customers and updates the revenue recognized with either a cumulative catch-
up or prospective adjustment, if necessary.
Method 3: Contract-by-contract approach
SAAS Corp does not expect the material right to expire unexercised and
therefore includes all of the material right periods as expected services. This
results in effectively amortizing the upfront fee ratably over the hypothetical
contract because the entity uses a time-elapsed measure of progress.

  Performance                          Contract              Expected                    Selling                       Price
  obligation                              price          consideration                price ratio                 allocation
  Service contract
  Year 1                                 $ 5,000                   $ 5,000                   33.3%                   $ 4,333
  Renewal option 1                          4,000                      4,000                 33.3%                       4,333
  Renewal option 2                          4,000                      4,000                 33.3%                       4,333
  Total                                  $13,000                   $13,000                    100%                   $13,000

In Year 1, SAAS Corp recognizes $4,333 as it satisfies the related service
performance obligation. The difference between the amount recognized as
revenue and consideration received of $667 ($5,000 – $4,333) is recognized as
a contract liability.
If Customer does not exercise an option, SAAS Corp recognizes as revenue the
amount allocated to the remaining renewal options.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                               Revenue for software and SaaS                                         503
         F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




F.   Step 5: Recognize revenue
     when (or as) the entity
     satisfies a performance
     obligation
     Questions and Examples
     Recognition of distinct software licenses
     Q&A F10                   Is software functional IP or symbolic IP?
     Q&A F20                   Under what circumstances, if any, does a distinct software
                               license provide the customer with a right to access the
                               entity’s IP?
     Q&A F30                   Can a software entity recognize revenue on an initial software
                               license before the commencement of the license term?
     Q&A F40                   Do physical delivery terms affect when control of a software
                               license transfers to the customer?
     Q&A F50                   When has a copy of the software been provided (or otherwise
                               made available) to the customer in an electronic delivery
                               scenario?
     Q&A F60                   How does a requirement to provide a key or access code affect
                               when control of a software license transfers to a customer?
                               Example F60.1: Delivery of software key
                               Example F60.2: Temporary access key
                               Example F60.3: Demonstration of software
                               Example F60.4: Possession of software via download
     Q&A F70                   Does the use of temporary software keys, rather than a
                               permanent key, change the revenue recognition for a software
                               license?
     Q&A F80                   How should a software entity consider the point-in-time
                               transfer of control indicators in the context of a software
                               license?
     Q&A F90                   Can a software entity transfer control of a software license
                               before the customer accepts the software when there are
                               customer-specific acceptance provisions?
                               Example F90.1: Transfer of control of a software license with a
                               customer acceptance provision




     © 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
     member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         504
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Q&A F100                  Can a software entity begin recognizing revenue on a distinct
                          software license renewal before the commencement of the
                          renewal term?
                          Example F100.1: Renewal license and bundled PCS
Q&A F110                  When does control of a distinct software license transfer to the
                          customer in a hosting arrangement?
Q&A F120                  If a software entity contracts with a customer for a license to a
                          specified software product that is not yet available for release,
                          has the entity transferred control of the license if it makes
                          available a substantially equivalent software product (including a
                          limited-release or beta version of the soft-ware) with the
                          promise to deliver the specified software product once it is
                          ready for distribution?
                          Example F120.1: Early release version of software product
Q&A F125                  Does granting price concessions to resellers/distributors affect
                          whether control has transferred?
Revenue recognition for software-as-a-service and services
that are software-related
Q&A F130                  Is a performance obligation to provide software-as-a-service
                          satisfied over time?
                          Example F130.1: Software-as-a-service
Q&A F140                  Are hosting services provided in a software licensing
                          arrangement satisfied over time?
Q&A F150                  Is a performance obligation to provide technical support
                          services satisfied over time?
                          Example F150.1: Technical support services
Q&A F160                  Is a performance obligation to provide unspecified updates,
                          upgrades and enhancements satisfied over time?
Q&A F170                  Is a combined performance obligation to provide a non-distinct
                          software license and non-distinct unspecified updates,
                          upgrades and enhancements (and/or unspecified software
                          licenses to additional products) satisfied over time?
Q&A F180                  Is a performance obligation to provide implementation services
                          in a software licensing arrangement satisfied over time?
Q&A F190                  Is a performance obligation to provide implementation services
                          in a SaaS arrangement satisfied over time?
                          Example F190.1: Distinct implementation services in a SaaS
                          arrangement
Q&A F200                  Is a combined performance obligation to provide a software
                          license and customization services satisfied over time?
                          Example F200.1: Combined software license and
                          customization services performance obligation




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         505
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Q&A F201                  Does an entity have an enforceable right to payment if the
                          contract does not explicitly state the entity's right to payment
                          upon contract termination?
Q&A F202                  Does the entity’s ability and intent to sue if the customer
                          terminates the contract indicate that it has an enforceable right
                          to payment?
Q&A F203                  Does an entity need to obtain a legal opinion to assess whether
                          it has an enforceable right to payment?
Q&A F204                  Can an enforceable right to payment exist for a contract priced
                          at a loss when an entity is not entitled to cost plus a margin for
                          performance completed to date?
Q&A F210                  How do customer acceptance provisions affect whether a
                          performance obligation is satisfied over time?
Q&A F212                  How does a software entity account for additional fees
                          identified through an audit of customer usage?
                          Example F212.1: User license audits
Q&A F216                  How does a software entity recognize fees associated with a
                          settlement with a non-customer who used the entity’s
                          software without obtaining a license?
Measuring progress toward complete satisfaction of a
performance obligation satisfied over time
Q&A F220                  When is it not appropriate to recognize revenue for a technical
                          support or unspecified updates/ upgrades/enhancements
                          ‘stand-ready obligation’ on a straight-line basis?
                          Example F220.1: Time-based measure of progress for
                          technical support services
                          Example F220.2: Time-based measure of progress appropriate
                          for unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements
Q&A F230                  What is an appropriate measure of progress for a combined
                          performance obligation that includes a software license and
                          rights to unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements
                          (and/or rights to use unspecified additional software products)?
Q&A F235                  When should an entity begin to recognize revenue for a ‘stand-
                          ready’ service promised to a customer’s customer?
Q&A F240                  What is an appropriate measure of progress for a combined
                          performance obligation comprised of software-as-a-service and
                          professional services?
                          Example F240.1: Software-as-a-service and non-distinct
                          services
Q&A F250                  What is an appropriate measure of progress for a ‘hybrid SaaS’
                          arrangement in which the on-premise software license and the
                          software-as-a-service (SaaS) element are a single performance
                          obligation?




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         506
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Q&A F260                  How should an entity measure progress in a combined
                          performance obligation satisfied over time that includes a
                          software license and software customization (or complex
                          implementation services)?
Q&A F270                  How should an entity measure progress in a combined
                          performance obligation satisfied over time that includes both
                          software customization and rights to unspecified updates,
                          upgrades and enhancements?
Q&A F275                  Over what time period should an entity recognize revenue
                          when the performance obligation has an indefinite term?
Q&A F280                  When is it appropriate to use the ‘as-invoiced’ practical
                          expedient for arrangements that contain a change in the unit
                          price under a time and materials (T&M) or transaction-based
                          contract?
                          Example F280.1: Changes linked to an observable index or rate
                          Example F280.2: Different per unit rates within a performance
                          obligation
Q&A F290                  Do upfront fees paid by the customer preclude use of the ‘as-
                          invoiced’ practical expedient?
                          Example F290.1: Upfront fees and application of the practical
                          expedient
Q&A F300                  Does a contractual minimum preclude the use of the ‘as-
                          invoiced’ practical expedient?
                          Example F300.1: Non-substantive minimum
                          Example F300.2: Substantive minimum, assume variable
                          consideration allocation guidance does not apply
Q&A F310                  Do contractual provisions such as tiered-pricing, rebates,
                          credits and refunds preclude the use of the ‘as-invoiced’
                          practical expedient?
Q&A F320                  Does the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient permit an entity to
                          wait until it has a right to invoice the customer to recognize
                          revenue (rather than accrue for revenue earned, but not yet
                          invoiced)?
Q&A F330                  Can the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient be applied to sales-
                          and usage-based royalties promised in exchange for a software
                          license?
Sales- or usage-based royalties promised in exchange for a
license of IP
                          Illustrative Example F1: Usage-based fees in a software
                          licensing arrangement
Q&A F335                  Does the royalty exception apply for an agent if revenue is
                          based on royalties from a customer’s license of IP?




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         507
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Q&A F340                  Should a software entity account for a minimum guaranteed
                          royalty promised in exchange for a software license as fixed
                          consideration or in accordance with the ‘royalties recognition
                          constraint’?
                          Example F340.1: Software license with a guaranteed minimum
Q&A F350                  Is it acceptable under Topic 606 to recognize revenue resulting
                          from a sales- or usage-based royalty in a period subsequent to
                          the period in which the customer’s subsequent sales or usage
                          occur if the entity does not receive reporting on those sales or
                          usage timely (i.e. on a ‘lag’ basis)?
                          Example F350.1: Royalties report received after financial
                          statements are issued
Q&A F360                  Are payments with fixed monetary amounts, such as milestone
                          payments, determined by reference to sales- or usage-based
                          thresholds, a sales- or usage-based royalty?
                          Example F360.1: Milestone payments linked to sales- or
                          usage-based amounts
                          Example F360.2: Milestone payments linked to sales- or
                          usage-based amounts and other items
Q&A F370                  If a sales- or usage-based royalty relates to more than one
                          license and other goods and services, does the royalties
                          recognition constraint apply if no single license is predominant?
Q&A F380                  Is a promise to provide future updates, upgrades and
                          enhancements a license of IP for purposes of determining the
                          applicability of the royalties recognition constraint?
Q&A F385                  Can the royalty exception apply when a software license is not
                          distinct from other goods or services?
Q&A F390                  Does a declining royalty rate that applies prospectively create a
                          material right for the customer with respect to future sales or
                          usage of a software license subject to the royalties recognition
                          constraint?
                          Example F390.1: Declining royalties – Prospective basis
Q&A F400                  Does a declining royalty rate that applies retrospectively
                          preclude recognition of royalties when the customer’s
                          subsequent sales or usage occur?
                          Example F400.1: Declining royalties – Retrospective basis
Q&A F410                  In an increasing royalty rate scenario, should the entity
                          recognize revenue at its expected ‘blended’ rate?
                          Example F410.1: Increasing royalty rate
Q&A F420                  How should a software entity attribute revenue from a sales- or
                          usage-based royalty subject to the royalties constraint allocable
                          to a performance obligation satisfied over time?




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         508
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                          Example F420.1: Usage-based fees in a software licensing
                          arrangement with PCS
Q&A F430                  Can a software entity apply the royalty exception when the
                          royalty is calculated on a financial metric other than sales?
Q&A F440                  How is the transaction price allocated in an arrangement that
                          includes sales- or usage-based royalties subject to a guaranteed
                          minimum?
                          Example F440.1: Allocation of guaranteed minimum among
                          multiple performance obligations
                          Example F440.2: Allocation of guaranteed minimum among
                          multiple performance obligations – revised estimates




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        509
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




        Step 1                    Step 2                     Step 3                    Step 4                    Step 5


                                Identify                  Determine                 Allocate the
     Identify the                                                                                              Recognize
                              performance                 transaction               transaction
       contract                                                                                                 revenue
                               obligations                   price                      price




This chapter is organized into four sections:
         Revenue recognition of distinct software licenses
         Revenue recognition for software-as-a-service and services that are
          software-related
         Measuring progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance
          obligation satisfied over time
         Sales-based or usage-based royalties promised in exchange for a license
          of IP



Recognition of distinct software licenses

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Performance Obligations Satisfied at a Point in Time
25-30 If a performance obligation is not satisfied over time in accordance
with paragraphs 606-10-25-27 through 25-29, an entity satisfies the
performance obligation at a point in time. To determine the point in time at
which a customer obtains control of a promised asset and the entity satisfies a
performance obligation, the entity shall consider the guidance on control in
paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-26. In addition, an entity shall consider
indicators of the transfer of control, which include, but are not limited to, the
following:
a. The entity has a present right to payment for the asset—If a customer
   presently is obliged to pay for an asset, then that may indicate that the
   customer has obtained the ability to direct the use of, and obtain
   substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the asset in exchange.
b. The customer has legal title to the asset—Legal title may indicate which
   party to a contract has the ability to direct the use of, and obtain
   substantially all of the remaining benefits from, an asset or to restrict the
   access of other entities to those benefits. Therefore, the transfer of legal
   title of an asset may indicate that the customer has obtained control of the
   asset. If an entity retains legal title solely as protection against the
   customer’s failure to pay, those rights of the entity would not preclude the
   customer from obtaining control of an asset.
c. The entity has transferred physical possession of the asset—The
   customer’s physical possession of an asset may indicate that the customer
   has the ability to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the
   remaining benefits from, the asset or to restrict the access of other entities
   to those benefits. However, physical possession may not coincide with



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        510
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




   control of an asset. For example, in some repurchase agreements and in
   some consignment arrangements, a customer or consignee may have
   physical possession of an asset that the entity controls. Conversely, in
   some bill-and-hold arrangements, the entity may have physical possession
   of an asset that the customer controls. Paragraphs 606-10-55-66 through
   55-78, 606-10-55-79 through 55-80, and 606-10-55-81 through 55-84
   provide guidance on accounting for repurchase agreements, consignment
   arrangements, and bill-and-hold arrangements, respectively.
d. The customer has the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the
   asset—The transfer of the significant risks and rewards of ownership of an
   asset to the customer may indicate that the customer has obtained the
   ability to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining
   benefits from, the asset. However, when evaluating the risks and rewards
   of ownership of a promised asset, an entity shall exclude any risks that
   give rise to a separate performance obligation in addition to the
   performance obligation to transfer the asset. For example, an entity may
   have transferred control of an asset to a customer but not yet satisfied an
   additional performance obligation to provide maintenance services related
   to the transferred asset.
e. The customer has accepted the asset—The customer’s acceptance of an
   asset may indicate that it has obtained the ability to direct the use of, and
   obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the asset. To
   evaluate the effect of a contractual customer acceptance clause on when
   control of an asset is transferred, an entity shall consider the guidance in
   paragraphs 606-10-55-85 through 55-88.
• > Licensing
55-54 A license establishes a customer’s rights to the intellectual property of
an entity. Licenses of intellectual property may include, but are not limited to,
licenses of any of the following:
a. Software (other than software subject to a hosting arrangement that does
   not meet the criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5) and technology
b. Motion pictures, music, and other forms of media and entertainment
c. Franchises
d. Patents, trademarks, and copyrights.
55-55 In addition to a promise to grant a license (or licenses) to a customer, an
entity may also promise to transfer other goods or services to the customer.
Those promises may be explicitly stated in the contract or implied by an
entity’s customary business practices, published policies, or specific
statements (see paragraph 606-10-25-16). As with other types of contracts,
when a contract with a customer includes a promise to grant a license (or
licenses) in addition to other promised goods or services, an entity applies
paragraphs 606-10-25-14 through 25-22 to identify each of the performance
obligations in the contract.
55-56 If the promise to grant a license is not distinct from other promised
goods or services in the contract in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-18
through 25-22, an entity should account for the promise to grant a license and
those other promised goods or services together as a single performance




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        511
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




obligation. Examples of licenses that are not distinct from other goods or
services promised in the contract include the following:
a. A license that forms a component of a tangible good and that is integral to
   the functionality of the good
b. A license that the customer can benefit from only in conjunction with a
   related service (such as an online service provided by the entity that
   enables, by granting a license, the customer to access content).
55-57 When a single performance obligation includes a license (or licenses) of
intellectual property and one or more other goods or services, the entity
considers the nature of the combined good or service for which the customer
has contracted (including whether the license that is part of the single
performance obligation provides the customer with a right to use or a right to
access intellectual property in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-55-59
through 55-60 and 606-10-55-62 through 55-64A) in determining whether that
combined good or service is satisfied over time or at a point in time in
accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-30 and, if over time, in
selecting an appropriate method for measuring progress in accordance with
paragraphs 606-10-25-31 through 25-37.
55-58 In evaluating whether a license transfers to a customer at a point in time
or over time, an entity should consider whether the nature of the entity’s
promise in granting the license to a customer is to provide the customer with
either:
a. A right to access the entity’s intellectual property throughout the license
   period (or its remaining economic life, if shorter)
b. A right to use the entity’s intellectual property as it exists at the point in
   time at which the license is granted.
55-58A An entity should account for a promise to provide a customer with a
right to access the entity’s intellectual property as a performance obligation
satisfied over time because the customer will simultaneously receive and
consume the benefit from the entity’s performance of providing access to its
intellectual property as the performance occurs (see paragraph 606-10-25-
27(a)). An entity should apply paragraphs 606-10-25-31 through 25-37 to select
an appropriate method to measure its progress toward complete satisfaction of
that performance obligation to provide access to its intellectual property.
55-58B An entity’s promise to provide a customer with the right to use its
intellectual property is satisfied at a point in time. The entity should apply
paragraph 606-10-25-30 to determine the point in time at which the license
transfers to the customer.
55-58C Notwithstanding paragraphs 606-10-55-58A through 55-58B, revenue
cannot be recognized from a license of intellectual property before both:
a. An entity provides (or otherwise makes available) a copy of the intellectual
   property to the customer.
b. The beginning of the period during which the customer is able to use and
   benefit from its right to access or its right to use the intellectual property.
   That is, an entity would not recognize revenue before the beginning of the
   license period even if the entity provides (or otherwise makes available) a
   copy of the intellectual property before the start of the license period or the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        512
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




       customer has a copy of the intellectual property from another transaction.
       For example, an entity would recognize revenue from a license renewal no
       earlier than the beginning of the renewal period.
• • > Determining the Nature of the Entity’s Promise
55-59 To determine whether the entity’s promise to provide a right to access
its intellectual property or a right to use its intellectual property, the entity
should consider the nature of the intellectual property to which the customer
will have rights. Intellectual property is either:
a. Functional intellectual property. Intellectual property that has significant
   standalone functionality (for example, the ability to process a transaction,
   perform a function or task, or be played or aired). Functional intellectual
   property derives a substantial portion of its utility (that is, its ability to
   provide benefit or value) from its significant standalone functionality.
b. Symbolic intellectual property. Intellectual property that is not functional
   intellectual property (that is, intellectual property that does not have
   significant standalone functionality). Because symbolic intellectual property
   does not have significant standalone functionality, substantially all of the
   utility of symbolic intellectual property is derived from its association with
   the entity’s past or ongoing activities, including its ordinary business
   activities.
55-60 A customer’s ability to derive benefit from a license to symbolic
intellectual property depends on the entity continuing to support or maintain
the intellectual property. Therefore, a license to symbolic intellectual property
grants the customer a right to access the entity’s intellectual property, which is
satisfied over time (see paragraphs 606-10-55-58A and 606-10-55-58C) as the
entity fulfills its promise to both:
a. Grant the customer rights to use and benefit from the entity’s intellectual
   property
b. Support or maintain the intellectual property. An entity generally supports
   or maintains symbolic intellectual property by continuing to undertake
   those activities from which the utility of the intellectual property is derived
   and/or refraining from activities or other actions that would significantly
   degrade the utility of the intellectual property.
55-62 A license to functional intellectual property grants a right to use the
entity’s intellectual property as it exists at the point in time at which the license
is granted unless both of the following criteria are met:
a. The functionality of the intellectual property to which the customer has
   rights is expected to substantively change during the license period as a
   result of activities of the entity that do not transfer a promised good or
   service to the customer (see paragraphs 606-10-25-16 through 25-18).
   Additional promised goods or services (for example, intellectual property
   upgrade rights or rights to use or access additional intellectual property) are
   not considered in assessing this criterion.
b. The customer is contractually or practically required to use the updated
   intellectual property resulting from the activities in criterion (a).
If both of those criteria are met, then the license grants a right to access the
entity’s intellectual property.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        513
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




55-63 Because functional intellectual property has significant standalone
functionality, an entity’s activities that do not substantively change that
functionality do not significantly affect the utility of the intellectual property to
which the customer has rights. Therefore, the entity’s promise to the customer
in granting a license to functional intellectual property does not include
supporting or maintaining the intellectual property. Consequently, if a license to
functional intellectual property is a separate performance obligation (see
paragraph 606-10-55-55) and does not meet the criteria in paragraph 606-10-55-
62, it is satisfied at a point in time (see paragraphs 606-10-55-58B through
55-58C).
• • > Example 54—Right to Use Intellectual Property
55-362 Using the same facts as in Case A in Example 11 (see paragraphs 606-
10-55-141 through 55-145), the entity identifies four performance obligations in
a contract:
a.     The software license
b.     Installation services
c.     Software updates
d.     Technical support.
55-363 The entity assesses the nature of its promise to transfer the software
license. The entity first concludes that the software to which the customer
obtains rights as a result of the license is functional intellectual property. This is
because the software has significant standalone functionality from which the
customer can derive substantial benefit regardless of the entity’s ongoing
business activities.
55-363A The entity further concludes that while the functionality of the
underlying software is expected to change during the license period as a result
of the entity’s continued development efforts, the functionality of the software
to which the customer has rights (that is, the customer’s instance of the
software) will change only as a result of the entity’s promise to provide when-
and-if available software updates. Because the entity’s promise to provide
software updates represents an additional promised service in the contract, the
entity’s activities to fulfill that promised service are not considered in
evaluating the criteria in paragraph 606-10-55-62. The entity further notes that
the customer has the right to install, or not install, software updates when they
are provided such that the criterion in 606-10-55-62(b) would not be met even if
the entity’s activities to develop and provide software updates had met the
criterion in paragraph 606-10-55-62(a).
55-363B Therefore, the entity concludes that it has provided the customer with
a right to use its software as it exists at the point in time the license is granted
and the entity accounts for the software license performance obligation as a
performance obligation satisfied at a point in time. The entity recognizes
revenue on the software license performance obligation in accordance with
paragraphs 606-10-55-58B through 55-58C.
• • > Example 59—Right to Use Intellectual Property
• • • > Case A—Initial License
55-389 An entity, a music record label, licenses to a customer a recording of a
classical symphony by a noted orchestra. The customer, a consumer products



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        514
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




company, has the right to use the recorded symphony in all commercials,
including television, radio, and online advertisements for two years in
Country A starting on January 1, 20X1. In exchange for providing the license,
the entity receives fixed consideration of $10,000 per month. The contract
does not include any other goods or services to be provided by the entity. The
contract is noncancellable.
55-390 The entity assesses the goods and services promised to the customer
to determine which goods and services are distinct in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-19. The entity concludes that its only performance
obligation is to grant the license. The term of the license (two years), the
geographical scope of the license (that is, the customer’s right to use the
symphony only in Country A), and the defined permitted uses for the recording
(that is, use in commercials) are all attributes of the promised license in this
contract.
55-391 In determining that the promised license provides the customer with a
right to use its intellectual property as it exists at the point in time at which the
license is granted, the entity considers the following:
a. The classical symphony recording has significant standalone functionality
   because the recording can be played in its present, completed form
   without the entity’s further involvement. The customer can derive
   substantial benefit from that functionality regardless of the entity’s further
   activities or actions. Therefore, the nature of the licensed intellectual
   property is functional.
b. The contract does not require, and the customer does not reasonably
   expect, that the entity will undertake activities to change the licensed
   recording.
Therefore, the criteria in paragraph 606-10-55-62 are not met.
55-392 In accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-58B, the promised license,
which provides the customer with a right to use the entity’s intellectual
property, is a performance obligation satisfied at a point in time. The entity
recognizes revenue from the satisfaction of that performance obligation in
accordance with paragraphs 606-10-55-58B through 55-58C. Additionally,
because of the length of time between the entity’s performance (at the
beginning of the period) and the customer’s monthly payments over two years
(which are noncancellable), the entity considers the guidance in
paragraphs 606-10-32-15 through 32-20 to determine whether a significant
financing component exists.
• • • > Case B—Renewal of the License
55-392A At the end of the first year of the license period, on December 31,
20X1, the entity and the customer agree to renew the license to the recorded
symphony for two additional years, subject to the same terms and conditions
as the original license. The entity will continue to receive fixed consideration of
$10,000 per month during the 2-year renewal period.
55-392B The entity considers the contract combination guidance in
paragraph 606-10-25-9 and assesses that the renewal was not entered into at
or near the same time as the original license and, therefore, is not combined
with the initial contract. The entity evaluates whether the renewal should be




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         515
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




treated as a new license or the modification of an existing license. Assume
that in this scenario, the renewal is distinct. If the price for the renewal reflects
its standalone selling price, the entity will, in accordance with paragraph 606-
10-25-12, account for the renewal as a separate contract with the customer.
Alternatively, if the price for the renewal does not reflect the standalone selling
price of the renewal, the entity will account for the renewal as a modification of
the original license contract.
55-392C In determining when to recognize revenue attributable to the license
renewal, the entity considers the guidance in paragraph 606-10-55-58C and
determines that the customer cannot use and benefit from the license before
the beginning of the two-year renewal period on January 1, 20X3. Therefore,
revenue for the renewal cannot be recognized before that date.
55-392D Consistent with Case A, because the customer’s additional monthly
payments for the modification to the license will be made over two years from
the date the customer obtains control of the second license, the entity
considers the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-15 through 32-20 to determine
whether a significant financing component exists.
• • > Example 61B—Distinguishing Multiple Licenses from Attributes of a
Single License
55-399K On December 15, 20X0, an entity enters into a contract with a
customer that permits the customer to embed the entity’s functional
intellectual property in two classes of the customer’s consumer products
(Class 1 and Class 2) for five years beginning on January 1, 20X1. During the
first year of the license period, the customer is permitted to embed the entity’s
intellectual property only in Class 1. Beginning in Year 2 (that is, beginning on
January 1, 20X2), the customer is permitted to embed the entity’s intellectual
property in Class 2. There is no expectation that the entity will undertake
activities to change the functionality of the intellectual property during the
license period. There are no other promised goods or services in the contract.
The entity provides (or otherwise makes available—for example, makes
available for download) a copy of the intellectual property to the customer on
December 20, 20X0.
55-399L In identifying the goods and services promised to the customer in the
contract (in accordance with guidance in paragraphs 606-10-25-14 through 25-
18), the entity considers whether the contract grants the customer a single
promise, for which an attribute of the promised license is that during Year 1 of
the contract the customer is restricted from embedding the intellectual
property in the Class 2 consumer products), or two promises (that is, a license
for a right to embed the entity’s intellectual property in Class 1 for a five-year
period beginning on January 1, 20X1, and a right to embed the entity’s
intellectual property in Class 2 for a four-year period beginning on January 1,
20X2).
55-399M In making this assessment, the entity determines that the provision
in the contract stipulating that the right for the customer to embed the entity’s
intellectual property in Class 2 only commences one year after the right for the
customer to embed the entity’s intellectual property in Class 1 means that
after the customer can begin to use and benefit from its right to embed the
entity’s intellectual property in Class 1 on January 1, 20X1, the entity must still




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         516
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




fulfill a second promise to transfer an additional right to use the licensed
intellectual property (that is, the entity must still fulfill its promise to grant the
customer the right to embed the entity’s intellectual property in Class 2). The
entity does not transfer control of the right to embed the entity’s intellectual
property in Class 2 before the customer can begin to use and benefit from that
right on January 1, 20X2.
55-399N The entity then concludes that the first promise (the right to embed
the entity’s intellectual property in Class 1) and the second promise (the right
to embed the entity’s intellectual property in Class 2) are distinct from each
other. The customer can benefit from each right on its own and independently
of the other. Therefore, each right is capable of being distinct in accordance
with paragraph 606-10-25-19(a)). In addition, the entity concludes that the
promise to transfer each license is separately identifiable (that is, each right
meets the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b)) on the basis of an evaluation
of the principle and the factors in paragraph 606-10-25-21. The entity concludes
that it is not providing any integration service with respect to the two rights
(that is, the two rights are not inputs to a combined output with functionality
that is different from the functionality provided by the licenses independently),
neither right significantly modifies or customizes the other, and the entity can
fulfill its promise to transfer each right to the customer independently of the
other (that is, the entity could transfer either right to the customer without
transferring the other). In addition, neither the Class 1 license nor the Class 2
license is integral to the customer’s ability to use or benefit from the other.
55-399O Because each right is distinct, they constitute separate performance
obligations. On the basis of the nature of the licensed intellectual property and
the fact that there is no expectation that the entity will undertake activities to
change the functionality of the intellectual property during the license period,
each promise to transfer one of the two licenses in this contract provides the
customer with a right to use the entity’s intellectual property and the entity’s
promise to transfer each license is, therefore, satisfied at a point in time. The
entity determines at what point in time to recognize the revenue allocable to
each performance obligation in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-55-58B
through 55-58C. Because a customer does not control a license until it can
begin to use and benefit from the rights conveyed, the entity recognizes
revenue allocated to the Class 1 license no earlier than January 1, 20X1, and
the revenue on the Class 2 license no earlier than January 1, 20X2.



                  Excerpt from ASU 2016-10

Determining the Nature of the Entity’s Promise in Granting a License
BC56. The Board decided that whether an entity’s promise to a customer
includes supporting or maintaining the intellectual property to which the
customer has rights largely depends on whether the intellectual property has
significant standalone functionality (for example, the ability to process a
transaction, perform a function or task, or be played or aired). An entity’s
ongoing activities that do not substantively change that functionality may affect
the utility of functional intellectual property but would not significantly affect its
utility. Therefore, continuing to support or maintain the intellectual property is



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         517
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




not part of the promise to the customer in transferring a license to functional
intellectual property. Functional intellectual property generally includes
intellectual property such as software, biological compounds or drug formulas,
and completed media content (for example, films, television shows, or music).
Patents underlying highly functional items (for example, a patent to a
specialized manufacturing process that the customer can employ as a result of
the patent regardless of the entity’s ongoing activities) also would be functional
intellectual property.
BC58. Licenses to functional intellectual property, if separate performance
obligations, generally will be satisfied at a point in time. However, the Board
included paragraph 606-10-55-62 in this Update because it would have been
inconsistent with the broader rationale for the Board’s revisions to the licensing
guidance to conclude that an entity’s expected activities that will (a)
substantively change the functionality of functional intellectual property (that is,
in a more than minor way) without transferring a good or service to the
customer and (b) directly affect the customer because the customer is subject
to those changes in functionality (for example, because of contractual or
practical restrictions on using an unmodified version of the intellectual
property) do not significantly affect the utility of the intellectual property to the
customer. In those cases, the entity is, in effect, only granting the customer
the right to access its intellectual property in its present form. The customer
does not obtain control of the license when it is first granted rights to the
intellectual property. This is because when the rights are first granted, the
customer obtains rights to intellectual property for which it will not have rights
for the full license period and the entity continues to perform throughout the
license period by making the changed intellectual property (for example,
changed code, content, or design) available to the customer. The Board
expects that, at the time of issuance of this Update, the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-55-62 will be met only infrequently, if at all. This is because
when an entity provides updates to functional intellectual property, the
provision of those updates typically is a promised service to the customer and,
therefore, the entity’s activities involved in providing those updates would not
meet the criterion in paragraph 606-10-55-62(a). For example an entity’s
activities to develop and provide software updates (such as in Example 10,
Case C; Example 11; and Example 55) or provide software customization
services (Example 11, Case B) would not meet the criterion in paragraph 606-
10-55-62(a) because the updates and the customization services are additional
promised services to the customer (that is, in addition to the license).



Scope of the licensing guidance
The licensing implementation guidance applies only to software licenses that
meet the criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5. Even if a contract states that a
license to software is part of the arrangement, a license does not exist for
accounting purposes when those criteria are not met. Instead, the contract is
for software-as-a-service (SaaS), to which the licensing implementation
guidance does not apply. Chapter A – Scope addresses determining whether a
contract includes a software license and the application of the criteria in
paragraph 985-20-15-5.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         518
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Determining whether a software license is distinct
See Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract.


Nature of the entity’s promise in granting a license
drives pattern of revenue recognition
The nature of an entity’s promise in granting a license to a customer is to
provide the customer with either a:
— right to access the entity’s intellectual property (IP); or
— right to use the entity’s IP.
The nature of the entity’s promise in granting a license:
— affects how and when revenue is recognized for a distinct license; and
— may affect how and when revenue is recognized for a combined
  performance obligation that includes one or more licenses. The nature of
  the entity’s promise to the customer in granting the license that comprises
  part of the performance obligation may affect how the general revenue
  model is applied to that combined performance obligation. This is because
  the nature of the entity’s promise to the customer in granting the license
  may affect whether that performance obligation is satisfied over time or at
  a point in time – i.e. because it may affect whether the customer controls
  an asset that is being created or enhanced by the entity as the entity
  performs – and will typically affect the measure of progress to the
  performance obligation if it is satisfied over time.

Pattern of revenue recognition for right to access licenses
A promise to provide the customer with a right to access the entity’s IP is
satisfied over time because the customer simultaneously receives and
consumes benefit from the entity’s performance of providing access to its IP as
that performance, which includes the entity’s activities to continue to support or
maintain the licensed IP, occurs. The entity applies the general guidance for
measuring progress toward the complete satisfaction of a performance
obligation satisfied over time in selecting an appropriate measure of progress.

Pattern of revenue recognition for right to use licenses
A promise to provide the customer with a right to use the entity’s IP is satisfied
at a point in time. As a starting point in the analysis, the entity applies the
general guidance on performance obligations satisfied at a point in time to
determine the point in time at which the license transfers to the customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         519
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                    Indicators that control has passed include a customer having...




      A present                                                                   Risks and
                               Physical                                                                 Accepted the
     obligation to                                      Legal title              rewards of
                              possession                                                                   asset
          pay                                                                    ownership




However, regardless of consideration of the general point in time transfer of
control guidance, revenue cannot be recognized before the beginning of the
period during which the customer can use and benefit from the license. This
means that revenue attributable to a license is not recognized until the
beginning of the license period, regardless of whether a license is an ‘initial
license’ (i.e. the first time the customer has obtained the license) or a license
renewal.

Nature of the entity’s promise determined by the nature of
the underlying IP
The nature of the entity’s promise as either a right to access or a right to use
the entity’s IP is generally determined by the nature of the underlying IP.
Topic 606 segregates IP into two categories:
— Functional IP – IP that has significant stand-alone functionality (e.g. the
  ability to process a transaction, perform a function or task, or be played or
  aired). Functional IP derives a substantial portion of its utility (i.e. its ability
  to provide benefit or value) from its significant stand-alone functionality.
  Examples of functional IP provided by the FASB in the Basis for
  Conclusions to ASU 2016-10 include software, biological compounds, drug
  formulas, completed media content and patents underlying highly functional
  items (e.g. a patent for a specialized manufacturing process).
— Symbolic IP – IP that is not functional IP (i.e. IP that does not have
  significant stand-alone functionality). Because symbolic IP does not have
  significant stand-alone functionality, substantially all of its utility is derived
  from its association with the entity’s past or ongoing activities, including its
  ordinary business activities. Examples of symbolic IP provided by the FASB
  in the Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2016-10 include brands, team or trade
  names, logos, and franchise rights.
The nature of the entity’s promise in granting a license to functional IP is to
provide the customer with a right to use the entity’s IP unless two criteria
are met.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         520
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                                       Right to use at a point in time –
                                 unless BOTH of the following criteria are met




   a) Functionality of the IP is expected to
   substantively change during the license                          b) Customer is contractually or practically
  period as a result of activities of the entity                     required to use the updated IP resulting
   that do not transfer a promised good or                               from the entity’s activities in a)
           service to the customer




Paragraph 606-10-55-62 further specifies that, when considering the first of the
two specified criteria, “additional promised goods or services (e.g. upgrade
rights or rights to use or access additional IP) are not considered.” The Basis for
Conclusions to ASU 2016-10 (BC58) states the FASB’s view that these two
criteria will be met rarely, if at all. To the date of this publication, examples of
scenarios that would meet these two criteria have not arisen. Therefore,
distinct licenses to functional IP (e.g. software licenses) will almost always
provide the customer with a right to use the entity’s IP.
Conversely, distinct licenses to symbolic IP always provide the customer with a
right to access the entity’s IP. Paragraph 606-10-55-60 explains that this is
because the entity’s promise to the customer in granting a license to symbolic
IP includes both:
— granting the rights inherent to the license; and
— supporting or maintaining the IP throughout the license period (or the
  remaining economic life of the IP if that period is shorter than the license
  period). An entity typically supports or maintains its symbolic IP by
  continuing to undertake those activities from which the utility of the IP is
  derived and/or refraining from activities or other actions that would
  significantly degrade its utility. For example, a professional sports team
  maintains its team name and logo by continuing to play games and field a
  competitive team.
Because symbolic IP has limited or no stand-alone functionality, a customer’s
ability to derive benefit from a license to symbolic IP depends on the entity
continuing to support or maintain the IP.

                                                                   Support or maintain the IP by
                                                                  continuing to undertake those
                                                                 activities from which the utility of
                                                                  the IP is derived and/or refrain
   Right to access license is                                     from activities or other actions
  satisfied over time: Benefit                                   that would significantly degrade
     depends on the entity                                                the utility of the IP
   continuing to support or
   maintain the IP. Promise
       includes BOTH to:
                                                                 Grant the customer rights to use
                                                                     and benefit from the IP




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         521
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




The following decision tree summarizes the evaluation to determine whether a
license provides a right to access or a right to use the entity’s IP.

      Does the IP to which the                                         The underlying IP is symbolic
      customer has rights have                                          in nature. The nature of the
       significant stand alone                              No          license is a right to access
           functionality?                                                      the entity’s IP

                              Yes


   The underlying IP is functional
             in nature




   (A) Is the functionality of the IP
  to which the customer has rights
    expected to change during the
      license period as a result of
  activities or other actions of the                     No
    licensor that do not transfer a
   promised good or service to the
                customer                                                The nature of the license is a
                                                                         right to use the entity’s IP
                             Yes


  (B) Is the customer contractually
  or practically required to use the
                                                         No
     updated version of the IP?

                             Yes


   The nature of the license is a
   right to access the entity’s IP


Determining the nature of the entity’s promise in granting a
license when the license is not distinct
When a single performance obligation includes a license of IP and one or more
other goods or services, the entity considers the nature of the combined good
or service for which the customer has contracted (including whether the license
provides a customer with a right to use or right to access the entity’s IP) in (a)
determining whether that combined good or service is satisfied over time or at
a point in time and (b) selecting an appropriate method for measuring progress.
The FASB concluded that not considering the nature of the entity’s promise in
granting the license that is part of the single performance obligation would




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         522
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




result in accounting that does not appropriately reflect the entity’s performance,
in some cases. For example, if an entity grants a 10-year license that is not
distinct from a one-year service arrangement, it would be inappropriate to
conclude that the combined performance obligation is satisfied over the one-
year service period if the nature of the entity’s promise in granting the license
would be that of a right to access the entity’s intellectual property over the
10-year license period (i.e. satisfied over time) if the license was a separate
performance obligation.
Considering the nature of the entity’s promise in granting a license that is part
of a single performance obligation is part of the overall requirement to
determine the nature of the good or service (which may be a combined item,
including a combined item that includes a license) in order to determine
whether that good or service is satisfied over time or at a point in time and the
appropriate measure of progress to apply. It is not a separate step or evaluation.
The FASB included the following examples in the Basis for Conclusions to
ASU 2016-10:
— The conclusion that the combined license and customization services
  performance obligation in Example 11, Case B (paragraphs 606-10-55-146 –
  55-150), is completely satisfied over the customized installation service
  period (i.e. none of the revenue allocated to this performance obligation is
  recognized after the customization services are complete) depends on the
  determination, first, that the license provides the customer with a right to
  use the entity’s software. It is only based on that conclusion that, the entity
  has completely satisfied the single performance obligation by the time the
  customization of the software is complete. In contrast, if the license were
  deemed a right to access the entity’s software (which we do not believe
  will occur under Topic 606), the entity would adopt a different measure of
  progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation,
  recognizing revenue over a longer period and in a different pattern, which
  would reflect the entity’s continuing performance obligation to provide
  access to the software over the license period after completion of the
  customized installation services.
— In Example 56, Case A (paragraphs 606-10-55-368 – 55-370), it is only by
  determining the nature of the entity’s promise in granting the license within the
  single license/manufacturing service performance obligation that the entity can
  appropriately apply the principle of recognizing revenue when (or as) the entity
  satisfies its performance obligation to the customer. If the license provides a
  right to use the entity’s drug patent, the entity’s performance is complete
  under the single performance obligation when the manufacturing service is
  complete. In contrast, if the license were to provide a right to access the
  entity’s drug patent, the performance obligation is not completely satisfied until
  the end of the license period such that some portion of the transaction price
  would be recognized after the manufacturing service is complete.
      [ASU 2016-10.BC66-BC69]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         523
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy US GAAP contained industry-specific guidance for licenses of software.
For other licenses – e.g. patents, trademarks, copyrights and
pharmaceutical/biotechnology applications – and for other intangible assets,
there was no specific guidance about whether license revenue should be
recognized over the license term or at inception of the license period. SEC
guidance applicable to the legacy US GAAP indicated that revenue for licenses
of IP is recognized “in a manner consistent with the nature of the transaction
and the earnings process”.
As a consequence, for licenses for which there is no specific legacy US GAAP
guidance, there was diversity in practice as entities evaluated their particular
facts and circumstances to conclude what manner of revenue recognition was
consistent with the nature of the transaction and the earnings process.
Specifically for software, the guidance on recognition of distinct software
licenses is consistent with legacy US GAAP in terms of recognizing revenue for
such licenses at a point in time. Legacy US GAAP similarly recognizes revenue
for software licenses that are separate elements at a point in time. As
outlined in the questions that follow, there may be differences between legacy
US GAAP and Topic 606 in terms of at what point in time various software
licenses are recognized.



                  Question F10
                  Is software functional IP or symbolic IP?


Interpretive response: Functional IP is defined as IP “that has significant
stand-alone functionality (for example, the ability to process a transaction,
perform a function or task, or be played or aired).” Because software has the
ability to process transactions or perform specified functions or tasks, it is
considered to have significant stand-alone functionality and, therefore, is always
functional IP.
The FASB listed software as its first example of functional IP in the Basis for
Conclusions to ASU 2016-10, and each example that includes a software
license within Topic 606 for which the nature of the underlying software as
functional or symbolic IP is enumerated characterizes the software as
functional IP.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         524
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F20
                  Under what circumstances, if any, does a distinct
                  software license provide the customer with a right
                  to access the entity’s IP?
Interpretive response: We are unaware of any circumstances that would result
in a distinct software license providing the customer with a right to access the
software entity’s IP. This is because the licensed software is functional IP (see
Question F10) and we are unaware of any fact patterns in which the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-55-62 would be met for a distinct license of functional IP
(including software licenses).
Paragraph 606-10-55-62 states that a license to functional IP provides the
customer with a right to use the entity’s IP unless both:
a. The functionality of the intellectual property to which the customer has
   rights is expected to substantively change during the license period as a
   result of activities of the entity that do not transfer a promised good or
   service to the customer. Additional promised goods or services (e.g.
   intellectual property upgrade rights or rights to use or access additional
   intellectual property) are not considered in assessing this criterion.
b. The customer is contractually or practically required to use the updated
   intellectual property resulting from the activities in criterion (a).
Paragraph 606-10-55-62(a), Example 54 in Topic 606 and the Basis for
Conclusions to ASU 2016-10 (BC58) each state that a promise to provide
updates or upgrades to licensed IP is a promised service in the contract with
the customer. Therefore, a software license will not meet criterion (a) above
solely because the software entity promises to provide specified or unspecified
updates, upgrades or enhancements to the customer. A software entity’s
promise to modify or customize the licensed software would also not meet
criterion (a) because the modifications or customizations are a promised service
the entity provides to the customer (regardless of whether the modifications or
customizations are distinct from the license).
Criterion (b) in paragraph 606-10-55-62 would also – i.e. in addition to criterion
(a) – not be met in many software licensing arrangements because the
customer is frequently not required to install those items. For example, in many
software arrangements, a customer that receives updates, upgrades or
enhancements is not required to, and often does not, install those items. The
customer chooses to forgo installing a particular upgrade or enhancement,
often deciding that it is more cost effective to wait until a later version is
released. However, even if a customer is required to install updates, upgrades
or enhancements, criterion (a) would not be met. And because both criteria
must be met, the license provides the customer with a right to use the
software.
It is also important to note that other potential characteristics of the license (e.g.
exclusive vs. non-exclusive, perpetual vs. time-based, and payment terms for
the license) will not affect the assessment as to whether a software license
provides the customer with a right to use or a right to access the entity’s IP.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         525
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F30
                  Can a software entity recognize revenue on an
                  initial software license before the commencement
                  of the license term?
Interpretive response: No. Paragraph 606-10-55-58C explicitly states that
revenue from a license of IP cannot be recognized before the beginning of the
period during which the customer is able to use and benefit from its right to use
the licensed IP. The Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC414) explains
that, in the Boards’ view, a customer cannot begin to use and benefit from a
license before the beginning of the license term.
Therefore, even if the software entity provides a copy of the software to the
customer before the beginning of the license term and would otherwise
conclude it has transferred control of the license (based on paragraph 606-10-
25-30 – see Question F50), the entity is not permitted to recognize the revenue
attributable to the software license before the beginning of the license term.
In the case of software license sales to reseller customers, revenue cannot be
recognized before the reseller is permitted to sell-on such licenses to its
customers. A reseller cannot begin to use and benefit from a software license
until it is able to resell the license to its customers; therefore, control of a
software license does not transfer to a reseller customer before that date.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The preclusion of revenue recognition before the beginning of an initial software
license term under Topic 606 is consistent with the legacy US GAAP software
revenue recognition guidance (paragraphs 985-605-55-101 through 55-104) – i.e.
both Topic 606 and legacy US GAAP consider the license undelivered (or not
yet transferred) until the initial license term has commenced.
Question F100 highlights the difference in timing of recognition for license
renewals under Topic 606 as compared to legacy US GAAP.



                  Question F40
                  Do physical delivery terms affect when control of a
                  software license transfers to the customer?
Interpretive response: In general, no. Under Topic 606, revenue cannot be
recognized for a software license before the customer is able to use and benefit
from the software. We do not believe it is possible for the customer to use and
benefit from software before it has possession of that software in a physical
delivery scenario. Therefore, regardless of whether the software is shipped
under FOB shipping point or FOB destination terms, the customer does not
obtain control of the software license in that physical delivery scenario before
the software is delivered to the customer.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         526
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, when physical delivery of the software occurred for
accounting purposes frequently drove the timing of revenue recognition for the
software license when it was a separate element of the arrangement. In
accordance with paragraphs 985-605-55-97 through 55-98 (superseded by
ASU 2014-09), the contractual delivery terms were generally respected for
accounting purposes – i.e. if Software Entity X shipped the software under
FOB shipping terms on December 31, 20X1, even if Customer C did not
receive delivery until January 1, 20X2, delivery was deemed to occur on
December 31, 20X1.
Legacy US GAAP did not contain a ‘use and benefit’ criterion. Consequently,
the timing of revenue recognition for distinct software licenses under Topic 606
and the timing of revenue recognition for separate element software licenses
under legacy US GAAP may differ in some physical delivery scenarios. It is
important to remember, however, that neither legacy US GAAP, nor Topic 606,
permits entities to recognize revenue related to time-based (i.e. term) licenses
before the beginning of the contractual license term – see Question F30).



                  Question F50
                  When has a copy of the software been provided (or
                  otherwise made available) to the customer in an
                  electronic delivery scenario?
Interpretive response: A copy of the licensed software has been provided (or
otherwise made available) to the customer at the earlier of when the customer:
— takes possession of the software via a download; and
— has been provided with the access code (or key) that allows the customer
  to take immediate possession of the software (see Question F60 for further
  discussion of software access keys and their effect on when the customer
  is able to begin to use and benefit from a software license).




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

In general, this is consistent with the guidance in, and practice that existed
under, legacy US GAAP.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         527
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F60
                  How does a requirement to provide a key or access
                  code affect when control of a software license
                  transfers to a customer?

  Software authorization codes (or keys)
  In a number of software arrangements, entities use authorization codes,
  commonly referred to as keys, to permit customer access to software that
  otherwise would be restricted. Keys are used in a variety of ways and may
  serve different purposes. For example, permanent keys may be used to
  control access to the software, or additional permanent keys may be
  necessary for the duplication of the software. Temporary keys may be used
  for the same purposes and also may be used to enhance the entity’s ability
  to enforce payment or to control the use of software for demonstration
  purposes.


Interpretive response: In general, if a software key (or access code) is
necessary for the customer to take possession of the software or to be able to
begin to use the software, the customer will not control the license until that
code has been provided.
However, if a key is necessary for the customer to take possession of, or begin
to use, the software, but that key has not been provided, the customer is still
deemed to have been provided a copy of, and be able to use and benefit from,
the software if it has the present, enforceable right to request such key at any
time and transfer of such key is effectively administrative or perfunctory – e.g.
the entity can generate the key effectively ‘on demand’.



                  Example F60.1
                  Delivery of software key
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer on June 30, 20X5 to grant a
license to Software Product Z for 10 named users. ABC makes the software
available for download immediately after the contract is executed, but requires
an access key. In accordance with the contract, ABC will provide the access key
when Customer provides the list of the 10 named users to ABC. Once the
named user list is received, ABC can immediately generate the access key and
provide it via email to Customer.
Absent consideration of the software key, ABC would transfer control of the
license to Customer on June 30, 20X5 (which is the beginning of the license
period). Customer provides the list of named users to ABC, and ABC provides
the software key to Customer, on July 10, 20X5.
Despite the fact that ABC does not provide the key until July 10, 20X5, ABC
transfers control of the license to Product Z on June 30, 20X5. This is because,
even though Customer cannot begin to use the software until the access key is




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         528
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




provided, it was within Customer’s control to obtain the key at any point in time
after the software was made available to Customer for download.



                  Example F60.2
                  Temporary access key
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer on January 10, 20X7 to license
Software Product A for three years for a nonrefundable fee of $600,000. The
fee is to be paid in six equal monthly installments of $100,000, the first
installment due when the license term commences on February 1, 20X7. ABC
makes the software available for download immediately following contract
inception. The payment terms in this contract are customary payment terms for
ABC for similar contracts.
ABC has a customary practice of using temporary access keys to enhance the
collectibility of payment and, therefore, delivers a temporary key to Customer
on February 1, 20X7 that expires in one month. ABC will continue to deliver
temporary keys to Customer, each with a term of one month, provided that
Customer makes the monthly payments as scheduled. A permanent key will be
delivered to Customer upon payment in full of the license fee.
Absent consideration of the software keys, ABC would transfer control of the
license to Customer on February 1, 20X7. Assuming Customer does not prepay
the license fee, ABC will deliver a permanent access key on July 1, 20X7.
ABC concludes that it transfers control of the license to Product A on
February 1, 20X7. The temporary nature of the access keys that will be provided
for the first five months of the license term does not affect when control of the
license transfers. This is because, assuming Customer fulfills its obligations
under the contract (which, in determining there is a contract between the
parties, ABC concludes Customer will do so – see Chapter B – Step 1: Identify
the contract with the customer), transfer of the additional keys after February 1,
20X7 is solely an administrative task.
Fulfillment of that administrative task does not prevent Customer from being
able to use and benefit from the Product A software throughout the contracted
license term.



                  Example F60.3
                  Demonstration of software
ABC Corp. grants Potential Customer access to an FTP site that contains
various software products and provides Potential Customer with a temporary
key to allow Potential Customer to evaluate each of the products for 30 days.
Potential Customer is not obligated to pay for the software until ABC delivers a
permanent key. Potential Customer does not owe any fees to ABC for the right
to try the software. If Potential Customer chooses to license any of the
software products, the license fee is equivalent to the price any similar
customer would pay for that license.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         529
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Despite the fact that ABC has transferred temporary keys to Potential
Customer, until Potential Customer decides to license one or more of the
software products, there is no contract between the parties. Potential
Customer merely has access to the software for demonstration purposes to
allow Potential Customer the ability to evaluate whether it wants to enter into a
contract with ABC to license ABC’s software.



                   Example F60.4
                   Possession of software via download
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer on April 10, 20X2 to grant a
license to Software Product G, which is to be delivered to Customer via
download from ABC’s download portal. ABC emails the Product G access key
to Customer on April 10, 20X2. However, at that time due to technical
difficulties with ABC’s download server, customers cannot access the portal to
download the software. Customer is unable to access the portal to commence
download of the software until April 12, 20X2.
Although Customer has been provided with the software key on April 10, 20X2,
it is not within Customer’s control to commence download until April 12, 20X2.
Therefore, ABC does not transfer control of the license to Customer until April
12, 20X2 because Customer cannot take immediate possession of the software
until April 12, 20X2, when ABC resolved the technical issues.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, an entity was required to have a customary business
practice of using temporary keys for collection purposes in order to recognize
revenue upon the delivery of the software and the temporary key. Revenue
recognition was not appropriate if software and a temporary key were delivered
for demonstration purposes (i.e. the customer was not obligated to pay until a
permanent key is requested and delivered to the customer).
In general, this is consistent with how we believe temporary keys will affect
revenue recognition under Topic 606 as well.



                  Question F70
                  Does the use of temporary software keys, rather
                  than a permanent key, change the revenue
                  recognition for a software license?
Interpretive response: As illustrated in Example F60.3 to Question F60, a
company may use temporary software keys to permit customers to use the
entity’s software for trial purposes. In such cases, there is not a contract until
the customer enters into a license for that software. However, if an enforceable



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         530
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




contract exists granting the customer the right to use the entity’s software for a
specified period of time (e.g. three years), a software entity would generally not
recognize revenue for that software license differently solely depending on
whether the entity provides the customer with a permanent key (i.e. good for
the entire license period) or provides a series of temporary keys (e.g. providing
the customer with a new access key each month or year of the contractual
license period).
The entity’s provision of temporary keys throughout all or a portion of the
license period would generally be considered an administrative task and the
entity’s choice with respect to use of permanent or temporary keys would not
change the parties’ enforceable rights and obligations under the contract – i.e. it
would not, for example, change the customer’s right to use the entity’s
software for three years into a series of shorter-duration licenses.



                  Question F80
                  How should a software entity consider the point-in-
                  time transfer of control indicators in the context of
                  a software license?
Interpretive response: In accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-58B, a
software entity applies the performance obligations satisfied at a point-in-time
guidance (paragraph 606-10-25-30) to determine at what point in time a distinct
software license is transferred to the customer. However, the indicators
provided in that guidance are not necessarily intuitive for licensing transactions.
While, in our view, the present right to payment indicator is not affected by the
nature of the good being a license, nor is the customer acceptance indicator
(see Question F90), the remaining indicators are evaluated somewhat
differently from a traditional tangible product or even the sale of IP. At least to
some extent, we believe the point-in-time control indicators – as they are
applied to licenses – are effectively redundant to the guidance in paragraph 606-
10-55-58C, which precludes revenue recognition for a software license
before both:
— the entity provides (or otherwise makes available) a copy of the software;
  and
— the customer is able to use and benefit from its right to use the software.

  Indicator                                         License evaluation
  The customer has legal title                      Title is generally not transferred for a license; rather
  to the asset                                      the rights conveyed to the licensee are conveyed by
                                                    the contract.
                                                    We believe this indicator to be met only once there
                                                    is an approved contract between the parties and the
                                                    customer obtains the rights to which it is entitled
                                                    under the contract, which is the point in time that
                                                    the customer can begin to use and benefit from
                                                    those rights. The software entity does not complete
                                                    its performance of transferring those rights (see
                                                    BC414 in the Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09)




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         531
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




  Indicator                                         License evaluation
                                                    before the customer can begin to use and benefit
                                                    from those rights.
                                                    Consequently, this indicator is duplicative to the
                                                    requirement in paragraph 606-10-55-58C(b), which
                                                    precludes recognition of software license revenue
                                                    before the customer can begin to use and benefit
                                                    from the license.
  The entity has transferred                        A software entity does not transfer the software’s
  physical possession of the                        source code to the customer (even though it may
  asset                                             be required to put the source code in escrow – see
                                                    Question C30); rather, it provides one or more
                                                    copies of the software to the customer. We believe
                                                    this indicator is met when the entity provides (or
                                                    otherwise makes available) the requisite copy of the
                                                    software.
                                                    This indicator is therefore duplicative to the
                                                    requirement in paragraph 606-10-55-58C(a), which
                                                    precludes recognition of software license revenue
                                                    before the entity provides (or otherwise makes
                                                    available) a copy of the licensed software.
  The customer has the                              Because the customer generally would not be able
  significant risks and rewards                     to obtain the significant rewards of the license
  of ownership of the asset                         before it is able to use and benefit from the license,
                                                    we believe this indicator is also (along with the legal
                                                    title indicator) generally duplicative to the
                                                    requirement in paragraph 606-10-55-58C(b).


Consequently, we believe it would be rare for an entity to come to a different
conclusion about the point in time a customer obtains control of a software
license based on the point-in-time control indicators than it would reach based
on the requirements in paragraph 606-10-55-58C. This means that revenue
attributable to a distinct software license will be recognized at the later of:
— the beginning of the license period; and
— the point in time a copy of the software is provided or otherwise made
  available to the customer (see Questions F40 and F50).



                  Question F90
                  Can a software entity transfer control of a software
                  license before the customer accepts the software
                  when there are customer-specific acceptance
                  provisions?
Interpretive response: It depends. If an entity can objectively determine that
control of a good or service has been transferred to the customer in accordance
with the agreed-upon specifications in the contract, then customer acceptance
is a formality that would not affect the entity’s determination of when the
customer has obtained control of the good or service. For example, if a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         532
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




customer acceptance clause related to a licensed software product is based on
being able to handle a particular volume of activity or perform a specific function
and the entity is able to verify compliance with that specification (e.g. can test
the software’s performance in a comparable test environment to that of the
customer), customer sign-off to that effect is perfunctory and the absence of
the customer’s formal sign-off will not affect when control of the license
transfers to the customer. [606-10-55-86]
In contrast, if the entity cannot objectively determine that the good or service
(i.e. the software license) meets the agreed-upon specifications in the contract,
then the entity would not be able to conclude that the customer has obtained
control until the entity receives the customer's acceptance. [606-10-55-87]



                  Example F90.1
                  Transfer of control of a software license with a
                  customer acceptance provision
ABC Corp. licenses ATM payment processing software to banks. ABC enters
into a contract with Bank DEF, a new customer, on September 30, 20X6 to
license its standard ATM payment processing software for five years for a fee
of $100,000. Bank DEF specifies that the software must be able to process at
least 1,000,000 transactions per week. Customer acceptance is indicated by
either a formal sign-off or the passage of 90 days without a claim under the
acceptance provisions. The $100,000 license fee is due and payable upon the
earlier of customer acceptance and the end of the 90-day customer acceptance
period. ABC provides a master copy of the software to Bank DEF on
October 15, 20X6. The five-year license term begins on December 1, 20X6,
which means the 90-day acceptance period ends on February 28, 20X7.
Scenario 1
ABC’s software is designed to be able to handle more than 1,000,000
transactions per week, and ABC has multiple customers currently licensing the
ATM payment processing software, using a similar configuration as Bank DEF
has requested, that have per week transaction volumes in excess of 1,000,000
transactions per week.
Because ABC can objectively determine that it meets the customer acceptance
criteria, that criteria does not influence at what point in time ABC transfers
control of the software license. Consequently, ABC determines that Bank DEF
obtains control of the software license on December 1, 20X6. That date is the
later of the date that ABC:
— provides Bank DEF with a copy of the ATM payment processing software;
  and
— the beginning of the period during which Bank DEF is able to use and
  benefit from the software.
And while ABC does not yet have a present right to payment for the license at
that date, ABC concludes that each of the remaining, applicable point-in-time
transfer of control indicators is met by that date – i.e. Bank DEF has (1) the
equivalent of legal title to the software license, (2) physical possession of a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         533
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




copy of the ATM software, and (3) the significant risks and rewards of
ownership of the license (see Question F80).
Scenario 2
ABC’s ATM software has not previously been configured in this fashion or
scaled for a customer this size. Consequently, ABC concludes that it is not able,
at the point in time Bank DEF would otherwise obtain control of the software
license (December 1, 20X6 – see Scenario 1), to objectively determine that the
software will meet the agreed-upon specifications.
Consequently, ABC concludes that Bank DEF will not obtain control of the ATM
software license until the earlier of (1) customer acceptance sign-off and (2) the
end of the 90-day acceptance period, provided the end of the acceptance period
is substantive (i.e. ABC does not have a customary business practice of
permitting customer rejection of ABC’s software or services after the end of
the contractually stipulated acceptance period).


Customer acceptance of a license dependent on a
distinct service element
A software entity may enter into a contract to sell a software license together
with services (e.g. implementation services) that permits the customer to reject
the software license if the services are not performed acceptably. In such
scenarios, entities should carefully evaluate whether the license and the
services are distinct from each other, but the presence of the acceptance
provision alone will typically not result in a conclusion that the license and the
services are not distinct – i.e. the software entity will still make the
determination about whether the license and the services are distinct on the
basis of the characteristics of the license and the services. Chapter C – Step 2:
Identify the performance obligations in the contract addresses considerations
about whether a software license and professional services are distinct in
further detail.
If the software license and the services are distinct from each other, the
acceptance provision related to the services (which includes the ability to reject
the software license as well) generally should not affect the timing of transfer
of control of the software license. Rather, the acceptance provision that permits
the entity to reject the software license should be viewed as a right to return
the software license. In these circumstances, the acceptance feature is
effectively a subjective right of return (see Question C70).




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The customer acceptance provisions in Topic 606 are generally consistent with
legacy US GAAP. A software entity’s considerations under Topic 606 in
determining whether it can objectively determine that a good or service meets
the agreed-upon specifications in the contract should not differ in any significant
manner from that entity’s considerations when applying the legacy US GAAP




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         534
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




software guidance (paragraphs 985-605-55-80 and 55-81) and SEC guidance
(SEC SAB Topic 13).



                  Question F100
                  Can a software entity begin recognizing revenue on
                  a distinct software license renewal before the
                  commencement of the renewal term?
Interpretive response: No. Topic 606 does not make a distinction between a
license that is for a renewal term and one that is for an initial term; and
therefore, consistent with the answer to Question F30 about initial software
licenses, revenue attributable to a software license renewal cannot be
recognized before the start of the applicable renewal period. Topic 606 explicitly
states that control cannot transfer for a license before the beginning of the
period during which the customer can use and benefit from the intellectual
property.
Often, a contract for a software license renewal includes additional
performance obligations (e.g. additional software licenses or services) other
than the renewed software license. In such cases, the entity would apply the
guidance in Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the
contract, Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance
obligations in the contract, and/or Chapter G – Contract modifications in order to
determine whether the additional products or services are separable from the
renewal license, and if so, how to allocate the transaction price in the contract
to the separate performance obligations.



                  Example F100.1
                  Renewal license and bundled PCS
ABC Corp. currently licenses software Product A to Customer under a multi-
year time-based license that extends through December 31, 20X4. Product A is
functional IP and, consistent with Question F20, the license to Product A was
determined to provide Customer with a right to use Product A.
ABC also currently provides PCS to Customer that is auto-renewed annually if
Customer has an active license to Product A unless PCS is canceled by
Customer. The software license and the PCS are separate performance
obligations, and ABC has an observable stand-alone selling price for its annual
Product A PCS and estimates the stand-alone selling price for its Product A
licenses using the residual approach.
On September 30, 20X4, ABC executes a license renewal that entitles
Customer to use the software for an additional two-year period commencing on
January 1, 20X5 and extending through December 31, 20X6 and also provides
for one year of bundled PCS (from January 1, 20X5 to December 31, 20X5) for a
total fixed contract price of $1,000. The observable stand-alone selling price of
the PCS is $200, which results in an estimated stand-alone selling price of
$800, using the residual approach, for the Product A renewal license.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         535
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




ABC does not recognize the $800 allocated to the renewal license until
January 1, 20X5 (i.e. when the customer obtains the right to use and benefit
from that license). The $200 in transaction price allocable to the PCS
performance obligation is recognized over time as the PCS is provided (from
January 1, 20X5 to December 31, 20X5).




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

While the timing of revenue recognition for initial software licenses is
effectively unchanged from legacy US GAAP to Topic 606, the guidance in
Topic 606 differs from that in legacy US GAAP with respect to software license
renewals (or extensions).
Under legacy US GAAP (paragraphs 985-605-55-105 through 55-114), the
portion of the arrangement fee allocable to the renewal of an active license was
recognized before commencement of the renewal term, provided that all of the
other revenue recognition criteria in Subtopic 985-605 had been met (i.e.
evidence of the renewal arrangement exists, the renewal fee is fixed or
determinable, and collectibility of the renewal fee is probable). This included
that the software vendor had vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value
(VSOE) over any other elements bundled with the license renewal (e.g. PCS or
hosting services). Under legacy US GAAP, because the software had previously
been delivered (i.e. with the initial license), revenue recognition was only
subject to meeting the remaining revenue recognition and separation criteria.
In contrast, Topic 606 states that revenue from a license, including a renewal
license, cannot be recognized before the beginning of the period during which
the customer can use and benefit from the software license even if a copy of
the software has already been delivered.

 Example                                     Legacy US GAAP                              Topic 606

 Three-year term license                     In general, assuming the                    The renewal license fee is
 that commences on                           other applicable revenue                    recognized on 1/1/X4,
 1/1/X1; on 6/30/X3 both                     recognition criteria have                   when the two-year
 parties agree to extend                     been met, the license fee                   extension period begins.
 the license for two years                   is recognized as revenue
 effective 1/1/X4.                           on 6/30/X3.




                  Question F110
                  When does control of a distinct software license
                  transfer to the customer in a hosting arrangement?
Interpretive response: In a software licensing arrangement where the entity
will host the licensed software, the entity may not provide (or otherwise make
available) a copy of the licensed software unless and until the customer
communicates its intention to exercise its contractual right to take possession




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         536
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




of the software. Consequently, because paragraph 606-10-55-58C(a) states that
revenue cannot be recognized before the entity “provides (or otherwise makes
available) a copy of the intellectual property to the customer,” the question
arises as to when the entity transfers control of a software license in a hosting
arrangement.
Other than with respect to providing (or otherwise making available) a copy of
the licensed software, the considerations for when control of a software license
transfers to the customer in an arrangement that includes hosting services are
not different from the considerations for other software licensing arrangements.
As for when the entity provides (or otherwise makes available) to the customer
a copy of the licensed software, we believe the criterion (paragraph 606-10-55-
58C(a)) is met when the hosting services commence provided that, at that point
in time, either (1) the customer has the enforceable right and ability to
download the software or (2) the entity has a present enforceable obligation to
provide the software key or access code necessary for the customer to
download the software upon demand of the customer. This is because if at
least one of those criteria is met it is within the customer’s control to take
possession of the software – i.e. to obtain a copy of the licensed software.
Consistent with the underlying logic in Example F60.1, it would be counter-
intuitive to the concept of control to preclude or delay revenue recognition for
an event that is solely within the control of the customer.



                  Question F120
                  If a software entity contracts with a customer for a
                  license to a specified software product that is not
                  yet available for release, has the entity transferred
                  control of the license if it makes available a
                  substantially equivalent software product (including
                  a limited-release or beta version of the soft-ware)
                  with the promise to deliver the specified software
                  product once it is ready for distribution?

  Software product that has not yet been through the entity’s normal
  quality assurance process
  A customer may wish to license a newer version of an entity’s software
  product that has not yet been made available for general release or
  distribution. In some cases, the entity may deliver a limited-release (e.g. beta)
  version of a product that is in the latter stages of development to be used by
  the customer until development of the product is completed (including the
  entity’s normal quality assurance process) and the software is made available
  for general release. In such arrangements, there is typically an implied (or
  contractual) obligation for the entity to deliver the final product when the
  quality assurance process is complete and the software is made available for
  general release.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         537
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Interpretive response: In general, if the software entity and the customer
contract for a license to a specified software product, control of the software
license does not transfer until that software product is made available to the
customer. That is, making available a different software product (i.e. one with
more than minimal differences in features and/or functionality – see
Question C80) from that promised to the customer in the contract would
generally mean the entity has not fulfilled its performance obligation to transfer
a license to the contracted software product. However, transferring a license to
the substitute software product would likely have at least some value to the
customer such that a portion of the transaction price would be allocated to
that license.
However, we believe certain facts and circumstances could result in a different
conclusion. For example:
— Some customers request an early-release version of the software (e.g. an
  alpha or beta version) if the contracted software is not yet available for
  commercial release, and having access to the early-release version will
  provide them substantive benefit. For example, this may be because the
  customer will use the software as a component to its own products and
  having access to the early-release version will permit the customer to
  concurrently advance development of its own products, rather than waiting
  for commercial release of the software. In these cases, the contract may,
  explicitly or implicitly, contain a promise to transfer a license to the early-
  release version as well as a promise to provide a specified upgrade – i.e. to
  the contracted version (e.g. commercial release version) of the software.
  Control of the license to the early-release version would transfer in the
  same manner as any other software license, while a portion of the
  transaction price would be allocated to the specified upgrade and
  recognized only when that specified upgrade is made available to the
  customer. It is important in arrangements of this nature to consider
  whether the customer has an enforceable right to use the early-release
  version and the entity an enforceable obligation to provide both that early-
  release version and the commercial release version, as well as to consider
  whether the provision of the early-release version is substantive (i.e. has a
  valid commercial purpose).
      In some arrangements of this nature, the customer will also have an
      unspecified upgrade right to obtain development versions produced in
      between transfer of the early-release version and release of the contracted
      version. For example, the customer may first obtain an alpha version of the
      software, but have rights to an unspecified number of additional releases
      that will come after the alpha version, but before commercial release of the
      software. Entities should be aware that this would also be an additional
      promise to the customer in the contract and that they will need to evaluate
      whether each promised good or service is distinct (Questions C170 and
      C340 discuss considerations about whether unspecified and specified
      upgrades, respectively, are distinct from a software license).
— If the entity delivers a substitute software product with no more than
  minimal differences in features and/or functionality from the software
  product for which the customer has contracted, the software entity could
  conclude that the right to the contracted software is solely an exchange




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         538
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




      right, and therefore, that it has transferred control of the software license
      when it makes available the substantially equivalent limited-release version
      of the software (i.e. provided the other transfer of control requirements
      have been met).
— If the customer will retain rights to use a substitute software product after it
  receives the contracted software product (i.e. the customer will have rights to
  use two different software products – Question C340 includes considerations
  in evaluating whether an item is an upgrade/enhancement or an additional
  software product), this would generally mean the customer is obtaining two
  licenses and the entity would separately consider when control of each license
  transfers to the customer.



                  Example F120.1
                  Early release version of software product
ABC Corp. and Customer enter into a contract for Customer to license the
commercial release version of Software Product G for four years; however,
Product G is not yet available for commercial release. Commercial release of
Product G is not expected for approximately six months; however, ABC
presently has an alpha version of the software developed. Customer requests
ABC to provide the alpha version in the interim; this is because access to the
early-release version will permit Customer to accelerate its own product
development that makes use of ABC’s software. ABC agrees and also commits
to provide interim versions of the software that are developed between the
alpha version and the commercial release version. Provision of the alpha version
before commercial release does not change the overall term of the license to
the commercial release version of the software – i.e. the four-year term of the
license to the specified commercial release version still commences upon
transfer of the commercial release version. Therefore, the period during which
Customer has rights to use pre-commercial release versions of the software is
incremental to the four-year term and will commence when the alpha version
license is transferred to Customer (see next paragraph).
ABC delivers a copy of the alpha version to Customer on January 31, 20X5 and
Customer is permitted to use the software immediately. ABC delivers the
commercial release version to Customer on August 10, 20X5; and during the
intervening period, ABC provided Customer with two interim releases, including
the beta version. At contract inception, ABC could not predict how many interim
releases would be provided to Customer before the commercial release version
or when they would be provided.
ABC concludes that the contract includes four promised goods and services:
— a license to the alpha version of the software;
— a promise to provide a specified upgrade to the software – i.e. to the
  commercial release version of the software;
— a promise to provide when-and-if available upgrades to the software
  throughout both (a) the period between transfer of the alpha version and
  transfer of the commercial release version and (b) the four-year commercial
  release license period; and




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         539
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




— technical support services that will be provided throughout both (a) the
  period between transfer of the alpha version and transfer of the commercial
  release version and (b) the four-year commercial release license period.
ABC concludes that there is a license granted to the alpha version of the
software because Customer requested and ABC agreed to provide Customer
with the right to use the alpha version and to provide the commercial release
version later when available. ABC concludes that the software license to the
alpha version is transferred to Customer on January 31, 20X5, which is the date
the software is made available to Customer and Customer can begin to use and
benefit from it.
ABC concludes that its promise to transfer the commercial release version of
the software (the specified upgrade) is satisfied on August 10, 20X5 when it is
provided to the customer.
Consistent with the discussion in Question C130, ABC concludes the
unspecified upgrade right and the technical support services are stand-ready
obligations that ABC will satisfy over time. Because the number and timing of
the upgrades and support needs is uncertain, ABC concludes that it is
appropriate to use a time-elapsed output measure of progress to recognize the
revenue allocated to those performance obligations, consistent with the pattern
of benefit to the customer of those services.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

When an entity delivered a limited release version of software and an implied or
contractual obligation existed to deliver a final general release, the delivery
criterion of the legacy US GAAP software revenue recognition guidance was
not considered met; and therefore, revenue was not recognized upon delivery
of the limited-release version of the software, even if the entity had received
payment, because the entity had not yet delivered the final product that the
customer ordered. Revenue would be recognized when the final product was
delivered, provided that all of the other software revenue recognition criteria
had been met at that point (note that in Example F120.1, because the license
and the PCS are co-terminus, the entity would not have had VSOE of fair value
for that PCS and revenue for the entire arrangement would have been
recognized ratably from the time the specified upgrade was delivered until the
end of the four-year license period).
Based on the discussion above, we believe entities are likely to recognize
revenue sooner than they did under legacy US GAAP, both because of the
differences in the separation guidance (i.e. not needing VSOE for the specified
upgrade, the technical support or the unspecified upgrade rights) and the
delivery guidance (i.e. the conclusion under legacy US GAAP that delivery of the
limited release version of the software did not constitute delivery of a software
product). Specifically, in the case where the substitute product has no more
than minimal differences from the contracted product, the amount allocated to
the software license may be recognized earlier than under legacy US GAAP.
Meanwhile, in a scenario where the entity is deemed to grant the customer a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         540
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




license to an early-release version and a specified upgrade, or a license to the
substitute product and a license to the contracted software product, the portion
of the total revenue allocated to the early-release license or the substitute
product license will generally be recognized earlier than revenue was
permitted to be recognized under legacy US GAAP because revenue under
legacy US GAAP would have been deferred until the contracted software
was delivered.



                   Question F125
                   Does granting price concessions to
                   resellers/distributors affect whether control has
                   transferred?
Interpretive response: No. Granting price concessions does not affect whether
an entity transfers control of a good or service. However, a pattern of granting
price concessions to resellers/distributors may affect the transaction price,
which is determined in Step 3 (see Question D130).



Revenue recognition for software-as-a-service
and services that are software-related

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Satisfaction of Performance Obligations
25-23 An entity shall recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a
performance obligation by transferring a promised good or service (that is, an
asset) to a customer. An asset is transferred when (or as) the customer obtains
control of that asset.
25-24 For each performance obligation identified in accordance with
paragraphs 606-10-25-14 through 25-22, an entity shall determine at contract
inception whether it satisfies the performance obligation over time (in
accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-27 through 25-29) or satisfies the
performance obligation at a point in time (in accordance with paragraph 606-10-
25-30). If an entity does not satisfy a performance obligation over time, the
performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time.
25-25 Goods and services are assets, even if only momentarily, when they are
received and used (as in the case of many services). Control of an asset refers
to the ability to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining
benefits from, the asset. Control includes the ability to prevent other entities
from directing the use of, and obtaining the benefits from, an asset. The
benefits of an asset are the potential cash flows (inflows or savings in
outflows) that can be obtained directly or indirectly in many ways, such as by:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        541
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




a. Using the asset to produce goods or provide services (including public
   services)
b. Using the asset to enhance the value of other assets
c. Using the asset to settle liabilities or reduce expenses
d. Selling or exchanging the asset
e. Pledging the asset to secure a loan
f. Holding the asset.
25-26 When evaluating whether a customer obtains control of an asset, an
entity shall consider any agreement to repurchase the asset (see
paragraphs 606-10-55-66 through 55-78).
25-27 An entity transfers control of a good or service over time and, therefore,
satisfies a performance obligation and recognizes revenue over time, if one
of the following criteria is met:
a. The customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits
   provided by the entity’s performance as the entity performs (see
   paragraphs 606-10-55-5 through 55-6).
b. The entity’s performance creates or enhances an asset (for example, work
   in process) that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced
   (see paragraph 606-10-55-7).
c. The entity’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use
   to the entity (see paragraph 606-10-25-28), and the entity has an
   enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date (see
   paragraph 606-10-25-29).
25-28 An asset created by an entity’s performance does not have an
alternative use to an entity if the entity is either restricted contractually from
readily directing the asset for another use during the creation or enhancement
of that asset or limited practically from readily directing the asset in its
completed state for another use. The assessment of whether an asset has an
alternative use to the entity is made at contract inception. After contract
inception, an entity shall not update the assessment of the alternative use of
an asset unless the parties to the contract approve a contract modification that
substantively changes the performance obligation. Paragraphs 606-10-55-8
through 55-10 provide guidance for assessing whether an asset has an
alternative use to an entity.
25-29 An entity shall consider the terms of the contract, as well as any laws
that apply to the contract, when evaluating whether it has an enforceable right
to payment for performance completed to date in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-27(c). The right to payment for performance completed to
date does not need to be for a fixed amount. However, at all times throughout
the duration of the contract, the entity must be entitled to an amount that at
least compensates the entity for performance completed to date if the contract
is terminated by the customer or another party for reasons other than the
entity’s failure to perform as promised. Paragraphs 606-10-55-11 through 55-15
provide guidance for assessing the existence and enforceability of a right to
payment and whether an entity’s right to payment would entitle the entity to
be paid for its performance completed to date.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        542
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




• > Performance Obligations Satisfied Over Time
55-4 In accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-27, a performance obligation is
satisfied over time if one of the following criteria is met:
a. The customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits
   provided by the entity’s performance as the entity performs (see
   paragraphs 606-10-55-5 through 55-6).
b. The entity’s performance creates or enhances an asset (for example, work
   in process) that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced
   (see paragraph 606-10-55-7).
c. The entity’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use
   to the entity (see paragraphs 606-10-55-8 through 55-10), and the entity
   has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date
   (see paragraphs 606-10-55-11 through 55-15).
• • > Simultaneous Receipt and Consumption of the Benefits of the Entity’s
Performance (paragraph 606-10-25-27(a))
55-5 For some types of performance obligations, the assessment of whether a
customer receives the benefits of an entity’s performance as the entity
performs and simultaneously consumes those benefits as they are received
will be straightforward. Examples include routine or recurring services (such as
a cleaning service) in which the receipt and simultaneous consumption by the
customer of the benefits of the entity’s performance can be readily identified.
55-6 For other types of performance obligations, an entity may not be able to
readily identify whether a customer simultaneously receives and consumes the
benefits from the entity’s performance as the entity performs. In those
circumstances, a performance obligation is satisfied over time if an entity
determines that another entity would not need to substantially reperform the
work that the entity has completed to date if that other entity were to fulfill the
remaining performance obligation to the customer. In determining whether
another entity would not need to substantially reperform the work the entity
has completed to date, an entity should make both of the following
assumptions:
a. Disregard potential contractual restrictions or practical limitations that
   otherwise would prevent the entity from transferring the remaining
   performance obligation to another entity
b. Presume that another entity fulfilling the remainder of the performance
   obligation would not have the benefit of any asset that is presently
   controlled by the entity and that would remain controlled by the entity if
   the performance obligation were to transfer to another entity.
• • > Customer Controls the Asset As It Is Created or Enhanced (paragraph
606-10-25-27(b))
55-7 In determining whether a customer controls an asset as it is created or
enhanced in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-27(b), an entity should apply
the guidance on control in paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-26 and 606-10-
25-30. The asset that is being created or enhanced (for example, a work in
process asset) could be either tangible or intangible.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        543
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




• • > Entity’s Performance Does Not Create an Asset with an Alternative Use
(paragraph 606-10-25-27(c))
55-8 In assessing whether an asset has an alternative use to an entity in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-28, an entity should consider the effects
of contractual restrictions and practical limitations on the entity’s ability to
readily direct that asset for another use, such as selling it to a different
customer. The possibility of the contract with the customer being terminated
is not a relevant consideration in assessing whether the entity would be able to
readily direct the asset for another use.
55-9 A contractual restriction on an entity’s ability to direct an asset for another
use must be substantive for the asset not to have an alternative use to the
entity. A contractual restriction is substantive if a customer could enforce its
rights to the promised asset if the entity sought to direct the asset for another
use. In contrast, a contractual restriction is not substantive if, for example, an
asset is largely interchangeable with other assets that the entity could transfer
to another customer without breaching the contract and without incurring
significant costs that otherwise would not have been incurred in relation to
that contract.
55-10 A practical limitation on an entity’s ability to direct an asset for another
use exists if an entity would incur significant economic losses to direct the
asset for another use. A significant economic loss could arise because the
entity either would incur significant costs to rework the asset or would only be
able to sell the asset at a significant loss. For example, an entity may be
practically limited from redirecting assets that either have design specifications
that are unique to a customer or are located in remote areas.
• • > Right to Payment for Performance Completed to Date (paragraph 606-10-
25-27(c))
55-11 In accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-29, an entity has a right to
payment for performance completed to date if the entity would be entitled to
an amount that at least compensates the entity for its performance completed
to date in the event that the customer or another party terminates the
contract for reasons other than the entity’s failure to perform as promised. An
amount that would compensate an entity for performance completed to date
would be an amount that approximates the selling price of the goods or
services transferred to date (for example, recovery of the costs incurred by an
entity in satisfying the performance obligation plus a reasonable profit
margin) rather than compensation for only the entity’s potential loss of profit if
the contract were to be terminated. Compensation for a reasonable profit
margin need not equal the profit margin expected if the contract was fulfilled
as promised, but an entity should be entitled to compensation for either of the
following amounts:
a. A proportion of the expected profit margin in the contract that reasonably
   reflects the extent of the entity’s performance under the contract before
   termination by the customer (or another party)
b. A reasonable return on the entity’s cost of capital for similar contracts (or
   the entity’s typical operating margin for similar contracts) if the contract-
   specific margin is higher than the return the entity usually generates from
   similar contracts.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        544
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




55-12 An entity’s right to payment for performance completed to date need
not be a present unconditional right to payment. In many cases, an entity will
have an unconditional right to payment only at an agreed-upon milestone or
upon complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. In assessing
whether it has a right to payment for performance completed to date, an entity
should consider whether it would have an enforceable right to demand or
retain payment for performance completed to date if the contract were to be
terminated before completion for reasons other than the entity’s failure to
perform as promised.
55-13 In some contracts, a customer may have a right to terminate the
contract only at specified times during the life of the contract or the customer
might not have any right to terminate the contract. If a customer acts to
terminate a contract without having the right to terminate the contract at that
time (including when a customer fails to perform its obligations as promised),
the contract (or other laws) might entitle the entity to continue to transfer to
the customer the goods or services promised in the contract and require the
customer to pay the consideration promised in exchange for those goods or
services. In those circumstances, an entity has a right to payment for
performance completed to date because the entity has a right to continue to
perform its obligations in accordance with the contract and to require the
customer to perform its obligations (which include paying the promised
consideration).
55-14 In assessing the existence and enforceability of a right to payment for
performance completed to date, an entity should consider the contractual
terms as well as any legislation or legal precedent that could supplement or
override those contractual terms. This would include an assessment of
whether:
a. Legislation, administrative practice, or legal precedent confers upon the
   entity a right to payment for performance to date even though that right is
   not specified in the contract with the customer.
b. Relevant legal precedent indicates that similar rights to payment for
   performance completed to date in similar contracts have no binding legal
   effect.
c. An entity’s customary business practices of choosing not to enforce a right
   to payment has resulted in the right being rendered unenforceable in that
   legal environment. However, notwithstanding that an entity may choose to
   waive its right to payment in similar contracts, an entity would continue to
   have a right to payment to date if, in the contract with the customer, its
   right to payment for performance to date remains enforceable.
55-15 The payment schedule specified in a contract does not necessarily
indicate whether an entity has an enforceable right to payment for
performance completed to date. Although the payment schedule in a contract
specifies the timing and amount of consideration that is payable by a customer,
the payment schedule might not necessarily provide evidence of the entity’s
right to payment for performance completed to date. This is because, for
example, the contract could specify that the consideration received from the
customer is refundable for reasons other than the entity failing to perform as
promised in the contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         545
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




For each performance obligation in a contract, an entity first determines
whether the performance obligation is satisfied over time – i.e. control of the
good or service transfers to the customer over time.
If the performance obligation is other than a distinct license of IP and one or
more of the following criteria are met, then the performance obligation is
satisfied over time. The entity, therefore, recognizes revenue over time, using a
method that depicts its performance – i.e. the pattern of transfer of control of
the good or service to the customer.

           Criterion                                                  Example

           The customer simultaneously                                Routine or recurring services – e.g.
           receives and consumes the benefits                         SaaS or technical support services
   1
           provided by the entity’s
           performance as the entity performs
           The entity’s performance creates or                        Developing software the customer will
           enhances an asset that the                                 host such that the development costs
   2       customer controls as the asset is                          are capitalizable by the customer in
           created or enhanced                                        accordance with Subtopic 350-40,
                                                                      Internal-Use Software
           The entity’s performance does not                          Customizing software specifically for a
           create an asset with an alternative                        customer’s needs that cannot be
           use to the entity and the entity has                       transferred to other customers and the
   3       an enforceable right to payment for                        entity has a right to reimbursement for
           performance completed to date                              its costs plus a reasonable margin
                                                                      throughout the customization period if
                                                                      the contract were to be terminated




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, if an arrangement to deliver software or a software
system, either alone or together with other products or services, requires
significant production, modification or customization of software, the entire
arrangement is accounted for in accordance with the guidance in Subtopic 605-
35 for construction- and production-type contracts.
Arrangements accounted for under Subtopic 605-35 are accounted for under
the percentage-of-completion method or completed contract method. For other
service contracts, revenue from services is generally recognized over time
using the proportional performance or straight-line method.
Under Topic 606, an entity currently applying these methods can continue to
recognize revenue over time only if one or more of the three criteria are met.
Unlike legacy industry- and transaction-specific guidance, the requirements in
Step 5 of the model to determine if a performance obligation is satisfied over
time are not a matter of scope, but rather are applied to each performance
obligation in the contract. When applying the Topic 606 criteria, some entities
may determine that revenue currently recognized at a point in time should be
recognized over time, or vice versa.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         546
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Customer receives and consumes benefits as the
entity performs
A customer obtains the benefits of an entity’s performance as the entity
performs if another entity would not need to substantially reperform work the
entity has completed to date if that other entity were to fulfill the remaining
performance obligation to the customer.
In evaluating this criterion, an entity would disregard potential limitations
(whether contractual or practical) that would prevent it from transferring a
remaining performance obligation to another entity. This is because the
objective of the criterion is to determine whether control of the goods or
services has already been transferred to the customer by using a hypothetical
assessment of what another entity would need to do if it were to take over the
remainder of the performance obligation.
The Boards observed that this criterion is not intended to apply to contracts in
which the entity’s performance is not immediately consumed by the customer,
which would be typical in cases where the entity’s performance results in an
asset (e.g. work in process). Consequently, entities that have contracts in which
the entities’ performance results in an asset (which could be intangible) being
created or enhanced should consider the second criterion.


Entity’s performance creates or enhances an asset
the customer controls as the entity performs
In evaluating whether a customer controls an asset as it is created or enhanced,
an entity considers the guidance on control in Topic 606, including the transfer
of control indicators.
The Boards created this criterion to address situations where an entity’s
performance creates or enhances an asset that a customer clearly controls as
the asset is created or enhanced. As the customer controls any work in
process, the customer is obtaining the benefits of the goods or services that
the entity is providing.
There may be cases for some performance obligations in which it is unclear
whether the asset that is being created or enhanced by the entity is controlled
by the customer. Consequently, it may be more challenging to determine when
control transfers and, therefore, an entity should evaluate the third criterion.
[ASU 2014-09.BC131]



Entity’s performance does not create an asset with
alternative use and entity has an enforceable right to
payment
The third criterion that, if met, results in a performance obligation being
satisfied over time contains two parts:
1. whether the entity’s performance creates an asset that does not have an
   alternative use to the entity; and




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         547
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




2. the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed
   to date (while expecting to fulfill the contract as promised).
The Boards observed that this criterion may be necessary for services that may
be specific to a customer (e.g. consulting services that result in a professional
opinion for the customer) or for the creation of a tangible (or intangible) good.
If an asset that an entity is creating has no alternative use to the entity, the
entity is effectively constructing an asset at the direction of the customer.
Consequently, the entity will want to be economically protected from the risk of
the customer terminating the contract and leaving the entity with no asset or an
asset that has little value to the entity. That protection is established by
requiring that, at all times, if the contract is terminated for reasons other than
the entity’s failure to perform in accordance with the terms of the contract, the
customer must pay for the entity’s costs plus a margin that is reasonable in
light of the performance completed to date. Payment for the entity’s costs plus
a reasonable margin on performance completed to date does not necessarily
require that the customer pay an amount directly proportional to the entity’s
performance completed to date – e.g. it may not be required that to meet this
criterion, the customer must pay 25% of the transaction price if the contract is
terminated when the entity is 25% complete. The fact that the customer is
obliged to pay for the entity’s performance (or in other words is unable to avoid
paying for that performance) at all times during the contract (coupled with the
fact that the asset has no alternative use to the entity) means that the customer
has obtained the benefits from the entity’s performance. [ASU 2014-09.BC142]

No alternative use
An asset may not have an alternative use to the entity due to contractual
restrictions. In such cases, the contractual restrictions must be substantive –
i.e. an enforceable right. For example, a software entity may be precluded from
transferring a customized functionality developed for a specific customer to
other customers. In contrast, if an asset is largely interchangeable with other
assets and could be transferred to another customer without breaching the
contract or incurring significant incremental costs, then the restriction is not
substantive.
An asset also may not have an alternative use due to practical restrictions or
limitations. A practical limitation on an entity’s ability to direct an asset for
another use – e.g. software customizations that are unique to a customer –
exists if the entity would:
— incur significant costs to rework the asset; or
— be able to sell the asset only at a significant loss.
When evaluating practical restrictions or limitations, an entity considers:
— the characteristics of the asset that will ultimately be transferred to the
  customer; and
— whether the asset, in its completed form, could be redirected without a
  significant cost of rework.
The focus in this assessment is not on whether the asset can be redirected to
another customer or for another purpose during the production process – e.g.
up until the point at which customization of the asset begins to occur. For




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         548
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




example, in some manufacturing contracts the basic design of an asset may be
the same across many contracts, but the customization of the finished good
may be substantial. Consequently, redirecting the asset in its completed state
to another customer would require significant rework.
Protective rights – e.g. a customer having legal title to the goods in a contract –
may not limit the entity’s practical ability to physically substitute or redirect an
asset, and therefore, on their own, are not sufficient to establish that an asset
has no alternative use to the entity.
The assessment of whether an asset has an alternative use is made at contract
inception and is not subsequently updated, unless a contract modification
substantially changes the performance obligation.

Enforceable right to payment
An entity that is constructing an asset with no alternative use is effectively
constructing the asset at the direction of the customer. The contract will often
contain provisions providing some economic protection against the risk of the
customer (or another party) terminating the contract and leaving the entity with
an asset of little or no value.
Similarly, an entity that is providing a customer-specific service (e.g. a
consulting service specific to a customer’s business), rather than constructing
an asset, will often require the contract to contain provisions that compensate
the entity for its efforts in the event the customer or another party terminates
the contract before completion (e.g. before the entity issues the final report or
communicates the findings).
The presence of an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to
date supports the conclusion that the entity’s performance does not create an
asset with alternative use and also supports that the entity is transferring value
to the customer over time as it performs (i.e. that it is satisfying its performance
obligation over time).
In assessing whether an enforceable right to payment exists, the entity
considers whether, throughout the contract, it is entitled to compensation for
performance completed to date if the contract were terminated for reasons
other than the entity’s failure to perform as promised. In addition to evaluating
contract terms, an entity would also consider the effect of Uniform Commercial
Code (UCC) provisions and relevant case law in assessing whether an
enforceable right to payment exists. When the payment terms upon termination
are silent, see Question F201 for guidance.
The entity’s right to payment may not always be for the contract value in a
prematurely terminated contract. However, the compensation should be based
on a reasonable proportion of the entity’s expected profit margin to date – e.g. a
right to recover costs incurred plus a reasonable profit margin. The entity’s
determination of the expected profit margin is made at contract inception.
Similarly, the amount to which the entity is entitled does not need to equal the
contract margin at all times during the arrangement (i.e. a pro rata amount
directly proportional to the entity’s completed performance to the date of
termination), but has to be based on either a reasonable proportion of the
entity’s expected profit margin for the contract based on the work performed to
date or a reasonable return on the entity’s cost of capital for similar contracts.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         549
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




If an entity would only recover its costs in an otherwise profitable contract, it
would not have the right to payment for performance completed to date. When
evaluating termination provisions in contracts priced at a loss, see
Question F204 for guidance.
Other factors to consider include the following.

  Payment terms                         — An unconditional right to payment is not required, but
                                              rather an enforceable right to demand or retain payment
                                              for the performance completed to date if the contract is
                                              terminated by the customer for convenience

  Payment schedule                      — A payment schedule does not necessarily indicate
                                              whether an entity has an enforceable right to payment
                                              for performance to date

  Contractual terms                     — If a customer acts to terminate a contract without
                                              having a contractual right at that time to do so, then the
                                              contract terms may entitle the entity to continue to
                                              transfer the promised goods or services and require the
                                              customer to pay the corresponding consideration
                                              promised

  Legislation or legal                  — If a right is not specified in the contract, jurisdictional
  precedent                                   matters such as legislation, UCC, administrative
                                              practice or legal precedent may confer a right to
                                              payment to the entity. For considerations when
                                              evaluating contracts that do not specify the payment
                                              terms at termination, see Question F201.
                                        — In contrast, legal precedent may indicate that rights to
                                              payment in similar contracts have no binding legal
                                              effect, or that an entity’s customary business practice
                                              not to enforce a right to payment may result in that
                                              right being unenforceable in that jurisdiction




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The basis for using the percentage-of-completion method for construction- and
production-type contracts in the scope of Subtopic 605-35 was that in many
cases the contractor had, in effect, agreed to sell its rights to work in progress
as the work progresses. Accordingly, the parties had effectively agreed to a
continuous sale that occurred as the contractor performed. This rationale is
similar to the second over-time criterion in Topic 606 – that control of a good or
service is transferred over time if the entity’s performance creates or enhances
an asset that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced.
However, the first and third over-time criteria in Topic 606 will require an entity
to think differently about the satisfaction of performance obligations. In general,
the effect of applying the new criteria will vary depending on the relevant facts
and circumstances, and differences in contract terms could result in different
assessment outcomes. These different assessments could create significant
differences in the timing or pattern of revenue recognition under Topic 606.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         550
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




If none of the over-time criteria are met
If none of the over-time criteria are met, then control transfers to the customer at
a point in time and the entity recognizes revenue at that point in time. That point
in time is determined considering both the principle for control and five indicators:

                    Indicators that control has passed include a customer having...




      A present                                                                   Risks and
                               Physical                                                                 Accepted the
     obligation to                                      Legal title              rewards of
                              possession                                                                   asset
          pay                                                                    ownership




                  Question F130
                  Is a performance obligation to provide software-as-
                  a-service satisfied over time?
Interpretive response: In general, yes. The customer will typically consume
and receive benefit throughout the contract period from the SaaS provider’s
performance of providing access to its hosted software – i.e. the customer in a
SaaS arrangement receives benefit throughout the arrangement period from
having the ability to access the hosted software as needed. This is consistent
with similar arrangements, such as a consumer in a telecommunications
arrangement; the consumer in a home cable or satellite television/internet
arrangement typically receives benefit throughout the arrangement period from
its ability to make use of the services (e.g. watch television or access the
internet) when desired.



                  Example F130.1
                  Software-as-a-service
SaaS Provider enters into a contract with Customer to provide Customer with
access to its hosted research application for three years on a SaaS basis – i.e.
assume Customer does not have the right to take possession of the hosted
software. There are no other promised goods or services in the contract.
SaaS Provider concludes that its performance obligation to provide SaaS is
satisfied over time on the basis that Customer receives and consumes benefits
from SaaS Provider’s performance of providing access to the hosted application
as SaaS Provider performs – i.e. Customer benefits from having the research
tool available to it whenever needed during the arrangement period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         551
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F140
                  Are hosting services provided in a software
                  licensing arrangement satisfied over time?
Interpretive response: In general, yes. The customer will typically consume
and receive benefit throughout the hosting period from the entity’s
performance of hosting and providing access to the hosted software, which
the customer would otherwise have to undertake itself or obtain another party
to do.



                  Question F150
                  Is a performance obligation to provide technical
                  support services satisfied over time?
Interpretive response: Technical support is typically a ‘stand-ready obligation’
(see Question C130), rather than a promise to provide a specified number of
support activities, which could be the case if the contract permits the customer
only a specified number of support calls over a specified period of time and that
number of calls is substantive – i.e. it is not, for example, significantly in excess
of any expectation of customer activity.
If technical support is a stand-ready obligation, it will generally be satisfied over
time because the customer will consume and receive benefit from the entity’s
resources standing ready to provide technical support when and as-needed
throughout the support period (subject to the contract’s terms, such as
availability only on weekdays and/or during specified hours of the day) as the
entity performs by maintaining its support infrastructure (e.g. helpdesk or call
center, online support FAQs, web desk).
However, if technical support is, instead, an obligation to provide a specified
number of support calls, the entity would generally recognize revenue as
the customer makes use of the specified calls, subject to considerations of
breakage.



                  Example F150.1
                  Technical support services
ABC Corp. and Customer enter into a contract for Customer to license Software
Product H and for ABC to provide technical support for the full three-year
license period. The terms of the support agreement specify that ABC’s
helpdesk and web support operators are available from 8am - 5pm each day
other than Sundays; while ABC’s web page providing support FAQs as well as
other ‘helpful hints’ is available 24/7.
Consistent with Question C160, ABC concludes that the software license and
the technical support services are distinct from each other and, therefore,
separate performance obligations.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         552
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




The distinct software license is satisfied at a point in time (see Question F20).
Meanwhile ABC concludes that the technical support services are satisfied over
the three-year technical support period on the basis that the technical support is
a ‘stand-ready obligation’ such that Customer consumes and receives benefit
from having access to ABC’s support resources, when and as needed,
throughout the three-year support period as ABC performs by maintaining its
support infrastructure (e.g. website, helpdesk) and making that available to
Customer in accordance with the terms of the support agreement.



                  Question F160
                  Is a performance obligation to provide unspecified
                  updates, upgrades and enhancements satisfied over
                  time?
Interpretive response: Question C130 in Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the
performance obligations in the contract concludes that a promise to provide
unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements is a ‘stand-ready obligation’
when the nature of the entity’s promise is to transfer an undefined number of
updates, upgrades or enhancements (i.e. any and all) that are developed during
the support period.
When a promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements
is a ‘stand-ready obligation’, the customer consumes and receives benefits
throughout the period for which it is entitled to those items. As described by
the FASB staff in TRG Agenda Paper No. 16 prepared for the January 2015 TRG
meeting, the customer benefits throughout the support period from the
assurance that any updates, upgrades or enhancements developed by the
entity during the period will be made available and, therefore, the performance
obligation to provide those items is satisfied over time. At the January 2015
TRG meeting, TRG members generally agreed that a time-based (i.e. straight-
line) measure of progress is not always appropriate for a stand-ready obligation,
including a promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements. Question F220 discusses when a measure of progress other
than one that is time-based would be appropriate for a stand-ready obligation to
provide unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements.
Question C130 further outlines that if an entity’s promise to the customer, or its
customary business practice, is to provide a defined number of updates,
upgrades or enhancements (e.g. a single release each year with all of the
accumulated updates, upgrades and enhancements developed since the
previous year’s release), that would typically suggest the nature of the entity’s
promise is to transfer a defined number of releases. It is not a stand-ready
obligation to transfer any and all updates, upgrades and enhancements (of an
undefined type and quantity) during the support period. In those cases, the
transfer of each update is generally a performance obligation satisfied at a point
in time.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         553
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F170
                  Is a combined performance obligation to provide a
                  non-distinct software license and non-distinct
                  unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements
                  (and/or unspecified software licenses to additional
                  products) satisfied over time?
Interpretive response: It depends. The entity must first identify the nature of
the combined performance obligation, which will often be a matter of judgment.
The specific facts and circumstances may affect the conclusion reached in
this regard.
If the software entity’s promise(s) to provide when-and-if available updates,
upgrades or enhancements (and/or additional software licenses) is a stand-
ready obligation (see Question F160), we believe it will typically conclude that
the nature of the combined performance obligation that is comprised of a
license (or licenses) and the promise to provide when-and-if available updates,
upgrades, enhancements or additional software licenses to new products is,
fundamentally, to provide the customer with ongoing access to an evolving (i.e.
changing) suite of software products. On that basis, we believe the software
entity would typically conclude that the customer simultaneously receives and
consumes the benefits from that access during the combined performance
obligation period (e.g. the three year co-terminus license and unspecified
update period).
The following examples from Topic 606 illustrate the conclusions reached by
the Board as to (1) the nature of a combined performance obligation that
includes a license to functional IP and unspecified updates and (2) whether that
combined performance obligation is satisfied over time.




                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Example 10—Goods and Services Are Not Distinct
• • • > Case C—Combined Item
55-140D An entity grants a customer a three-year term license to anti-virus
software and promises to provide the customer with when-and-if available
updates to that software during the license period. The entity frequently
provides updates that are critical to the continued utility of the software.
Without the updates, the customer’s ability to benefit from the software would
decline significantly during the three-year arrangement.
55-140E The entity concludes that the software and the updates are each
promised goods or services in the contract and are each capable of being
distinct in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19(a). The software and the
updates are capable of being distinct because the customer can derive
economic benefit from the software on its own throughout the license period
(that is, without the updates the software would still provide its original




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         554
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




functionality to the customer), while the customer can benefit from the
updates together with the software license transferred at the outset of the
contract.
55-140F The entity concludes that its promises to transfer the software license
and to provide the updates, when-and-if available, are not separately
identifiable (in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19(b)) because the license
and the updates are, in effect, inputs to a combined item (anti-virus protection)
in the contract. The updates significantly modify the functionality of the
software (that is, they permit the software to protect the customer from a
significant number of additional viruses that the software did not protect
against previously) and are integral to maintaining the utility of the software
license to the customer. Consequently, the license and updates fulfill a single
promise to the customer in the contract (a promise to provide protection from
computer viruses for three years). Therefore, in this Example, the entity
accounts for the software license and the when-and-if available updates as a
single performance obligation. In accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-33, the
entity concludes that the nature of the combined good or service it promised to
transfer to the customer in this Example is computer virus protection for three
years. The entity considers the nature of the combined good or service (that is,
to provide anti-virus protection for three years) in determining whether the
performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time in accordance
with paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-30 and in determining the
appropriate method for measuring progress toward complete satisfaction of
the performance obligation in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-31
through 25-37.
• • > Example 55—License of Intellectual Property
55-364 An entity enters into a contract with a customer to license (for a period
of three years) intellectual property related to the design and production
processes for a good. The contract also specifies that the customer will obtain
any updates to that intellectual property for new designs or production
processes that may be developed by the entity. The updates are integral to the
customer’s ability to derive benefit from the license during the license period
because the intellectual property is used in an industry in which technologies
change rapidly.
55-365 The entity assesses the goods and services promised to the customer
to determine which goods and services are distinct in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-19. The entity determines that the customer can benefit
from (a) the license on its own without the updates and (b) the updates
together with the initial license. Although the benefit the customer can derive
from the license on its own (that is, without the updates) is limited because the
updates are integral to the customer’s ability to continue to use the intellectual
property in an industry in which technologies change rapidly, the license can be
used in a way that generates some economic benefits. Therefore, the criterion
in paragraph 606-10-25-19(a) is met for the license and the updates.
55-365A The fact that the benefit the customer can derive from the license on
its own (that is, without the updates) is limited (because the updates are
integral to the customer’s ability to continue to use the license in the rapidly
changing technological environment) also is considered in assessing whether
the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b) is met. Because the benefit that the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         555
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




customer could obtain from the license over the three-year term without the
updates would be significantly limited, the entity’s promises to grant the
license and to provide the expected updates are, in effect, inputs that, together
fulfill a single promise to deliver a combined item to the customer. That is, the
nature of the entity’s promise in the contract is to provide ongoing access to
the entity’s intellectual property related to the design and production processes
for a good for the three-year term of the contract. The promises within that
combined item (that is, to grant the license and to provide when-and-if available
updates) are therefore not separately identifiable in accordance with the
criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b).
55-366 The nature of the combined good or service that the entity promised to
transfer to the customer is ongoing access to the entity’s intellectual property
related to the design and production processes for a good for the three-year
term of the contract. Based on this conclusion, the entity applies paragraphs
606-10-25-23 through 25-30 to determine whether the single performance
obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time and paragraphs 606-10-25-
31 through 25-37 to determine the appropriate method for measuring progress
toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. The entity
concludes that because the customer simultaneously receives and consumes
the benefits of the entity’s performance as it occurs, the performance
obligation is satisfied over time in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-27(a)
and that a time-based input measure of progress is appropriate because the
entity expects, on the basis of its relevant history with similar contracts, to
expend efforts to develop and transfer updates to the customer on a generally
even basis throughout the three-year term.



                  Question F180
                  Is a performance obligation to provide
                  implementation services in a software licensing
                  arrangement satisfied over time?
Interpretive response: In general, yes. In many cases, the customer will be
eligible to capitalize at least some portion of the costs of the entity’s
implementation services (e.g. in accordance with Subtopic 350-40 on internal-
use software). Consequently, the entity would conclude that those services
create or enhance an asset the customer controls as the entity performs (i.e.
meet the second over-time criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-27) and, therefore,
the performance obligation is satisfied over time.
In other cases, services characterized as part of ‘implementation services’ are
not capitalizable by the customer (e.g. costs of training or data
conversion/migration), and therefore do not create or enhance an asset for the
customer. In those cases, the services nevertheless are satisfied over time
because the customer consumes and receives benefit from the services as
they are provided (i.e. meet the first over-time criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-
27) on the basis that another service provider would generally not need to
reperform the services provided by the entity to date. For example, another
service provider would not need to provide training over aspects of the
software that the entity already provided, and once data is converted and



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         556
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




migrated from the customer’s legacy application, that does not need to be
converted or migrated a second time (even if there is additional data that has
not yet been converted or migrated).
Therefore, in summary, it typically will be the case that the entity will satisfy its
performance obligation to provide implementation services over time regardless
of whether the customer can capitalize the cost of those services. Therefore,
the information needs for customers to do their accounting may differ from
those of the entity.



                  Question F190
                  Is a performance obligation to provide
                  implementation services in a SaaS arrangement
                  satisfied over time?
Interpretive response: In general, yes. Some common SaaS implementation
services will create an asset for the customer. For example, if a SaaS Provider
is developing software for the customer – e.g. developing an application
program interface (API) connector – those costs will create an asset for the
customer in accordance with Subtopic 350-40 on internal-use software if the
customer will run that software on its servers or the developed software
otherwise meets the criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5. In those cases, the
entity would conclude that its services create or enhance an asset the customer
controls as the entity performs (i.e. meet the second over-time criterion in
paragraph 606-10-25-27) and, therefore, the performance obligation is satisfied
over time.
Other SaaS implementation services will not create or enhance an asset
controlled by the customer. If services that will not create an asset for the
Customer would not need to be reperformed in the hypothetical scenario where
another service provider would be engaged if the entity does not complete the
services in full (see Example F190.1 below), then the Customer consumes and
receives benefit from the services as the entity performs and, therefore, the
performance obligation is satisfied over time.
Most common SaaS implementation services will fit into one of the two
categories described in the preceding two paragraphs. However, for any service
that does not meet one of the first two over-time criteria (e.g. a consulting
service provided by the entity to deliver a report on possible efficiencies the
customer could gain from using the entity’s SaaS), that service may still be
satisfied over time if it meets the third over-time criterion – i.e. the entity’s
performance does not create an asset with alternative use to the entity and the
entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance to date.
Remember that it is important to distinguish ‘set-up activities’ from
implementation services (see Question C220). Set-up activities cannot be a
performance obligation and, therefore, are not assessed for over-time or point-
in-time satisfaction separate from the performance obligation of which they are
a part.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         557
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Example F190.1
                  Distinct implementation services in a SaaS
                  arrangement
ABC Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers for which
customers generally pay a fixed monthly or quarterly fee. Customers are not
permitted to take possession of ABC’s software. ABC and Customer enter into
a contract for Customer to use ABC’s SaaS for three years.
As part of the contract, ABC agrees to perform a variety of services before
Customer goes live with ABC’s SaaS. These services include training
Customer’s personnel, converting and migrating Customer’s data from its
current on-premise solution to ABC’s hosted environment, and building an
interface to permit the hosted application to supply data to Customer’s on-
premise general ledger system.
ABC has previously concluded that each of the services is a promised service
(rather than a set-up activity) and that the services are distinct from the SaaS
offering – see Example C280.1.
The following additional facts are relevant.
— The interface will be resident on the Customer’s servers such that
  Customer concludes the interface is an asset. Because the interface will
  qualify as internal-use software within the scope of Subtopic 350-40, much
  of the development costs (that will be paid by Customer to ABC) are
  capitalizable by the customer.
— The training and data conversion/migration services do not create an asset
  for Customer and, in fact, Subtopic 350-40 requires Customer to expense
  the related costs as incurred.
ABC concludes that the distinct implementation services are satisfied over
time. In the case of the services to develop the general ledger system interface,
ABC’s performance creates an internal-use software asset for Customer that
Customer controls as ABC performs. In the case of the training and data
conversion/migration services, Customer consumes and receives benefit from
each of those services as ABC performs because another entity would not need
to reperform ABC’s work if ABC were to discontinue the services at any point –
i.e. Customer would not need to be re-trained on aspects of the application for
which ABC already provided training and would not need to have another entity
re-convert or re-migrate data already converted/migrated by ABC.
ABC further concludes that its separate performance obligation to provide the
SaaS offering is satisfied over time on a basis consistent with that in
Example F130.1.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         558
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F200
                  Is a combined performance obligation to provide a
                  software license and customization services
                  satisfied over time?
Interpretive response: Example 11, Case B, in Topic 606 (included below)
illustrates a scenario in which a software license and services to customize that
software are not distinct from each other and, therefore, are a single
performance obligation to the customer. However, the example does not
conclude, or provide discussion about, whether that single performance
obligation is satisfied over time or, instead, at the point in time the customized
software is transferred to the customer.
A combined performance obligation to provide software customization is
recognized over time if either:
— the customer controls an asset that is being created or enhanced by the
  entity (paragraph 606-10-25-27(b)) – which we believe will frequently be the
  case (see below); or
— the software entity’s performance does not create an asset with alternative
  use to the entity and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for
  performance completed to date (paragraph 606-10-25-27(c)).
The customer controls an asset that is being created or enhanced by the
entity
We believe that in most cases similar to that in Example 11, Case B, the costs
to customize the licensed software (or at least a significant portion of those
costs) will be eligible for capitalization as an asset by the customer. For
example, if the costs relate to the modification of software for internal-use (e.g.
custom modifications to an ERP system or to a platform the entity will use to
provide SaaS or process customer transactions), those costs (or a significant
portion thereof) would generally be eligible for capitalization in accordance with
Subtopic 350-40. In that case, the entity’s efforts create and then enhance an
asset the customer controls as the entity performs. Importantly, application of
this view is not predicated on the software entity knowing the customer’s
accounting conclusions; rather, the entity evaluates the relevant guidance
independently (i.e. based on its own knowledge of the licenses it is transferring
and services it is providing).
There is also an alternative view that also results in an ‘over-time’ revenue
recognition conclusion. Under that view, if the customer obtains control of a
license to the software before the entity begins to modify that license – e.g. the
entity provides the customer with a copy of the pre-modified software and the
customer is able to use and benefit from the software before the customization
services are provided – then the entity’s customizations or modifications
enhance that asset the customer controls.
Under either of these views, the combined software license and customization
services performance obligation is satisfied over time because the nature of the
obligation is the customization of an asset the customer controls as it is being
created or enhanced by the entity.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         559
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




No asset with alternative use and an enforceable right to payment for
performance to date
The considerations about whether a software entity has an enforceable right to
payment for performance to date are not substantively different from those that
apply in other, non-software specific scenarios. Consequently, a software
entity’s evaluation of these items would generally include the same
considerations outlined in the summary to this section applicable to all entities.
However, the considerations around ‘alternative use’ in a combined software
license and customization services scenario present more challenges in
interpretation. This is because the guidance (including the Basis for Conclusions
to ASU 2014-09) was not written in the context of an asset like software that
can be developed and licensed to many customers concurrently. Some
stakeholders have expressed that it is unclear whether the asset to be
evaluated for alternative use is the asset the customer will obtain (i.e. the
software license) or the asset the entity controls (i.e. the software IP).
We believe that, regardless of whether the asset is the license or the software,
the principal factor that will affect whether the asset has an alternative use to
the entity is the degree to which the customization of the software is customer-
specific in its completed state (i.e. when the customizations are complete).
Regardless of whether one views the asset as the license or the software, if
the customizations are specifically tailored to the customer’s needs such that
they could not be deployed to another customer without substantial changes
being made, then neither the license, nor the software customizations made
(i.e. the modified or additional code written), have an alternative use to the
software entity.
In addition, even customizations that could be redirected to another entity (or
for internal-use) would not have an alternative use if there is a substantive
contractual restriction on the entity’s ability to license the customizations to
another party or make use of them itself. Such a scenario might occur when the
customer wants to preclude the entity from licensing or selling the
customizations to the customer’s competitor – e.g. if they believe the
customizations provide them with a competitive advantage.



                  Example F200.1
                  Combined software license and customization
                  services performance obligation
ABC Corp. licenses trust asset management system software called Product B.
The Product B software enables users, typically large financial institutions, to
access and value individual US dollar denominated trust account portfolios on a
real-time basis. Product B functions as designed without any customization or
modification services and can be implemented without ABC’s assistance in
most cases.
ABC entered into a specific contract with Customer, a large bank, to grant a
license to the Product B software and to provide services to modify the
customer’s instance of the software. This includes modification of the software
code and configuration of certain modified and off-the-shelf settings to allow



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         560
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Customer to access and value its trust account portfolios in multiple foreign
currencies in addition to US dollars. ABC expects that it will take approximately
18 months to perform the services.
ABC provides Customer with a master copy of the software at contract
inception, and Customer has the right to begin to use the software in its off-the-
shelf form immediately if it wanted to do so under the terms of the license,
even though ABC expects Customer to ‘go live’ with Product B only after it has
been customized and configured to meet Customer’s needs.
In addition:
— ABC’s software is internal-use software to Customer.
— While most of the customizations ABC will make to Product B for Customer
  could be marketed to other similar banks, in its completed state, the
  customized version of the Product B software includes some highly
  customer-specific requests in terms of coding and configuration.
— While the contract does not include explicit termination provisions, relevant
  legal precedent in the jurisdiction governing the contract suggests
  Customer would be able to terminate the contract under certain
  circumstances in return for payment in full of ABC’s costs incurred to date
  plus a reasonable return on ABC’s capital expended.
In Example C230.1, ABC concludes that the software license and the
customization services are a single, combined performance obligation to the
customer.
In this example, ABC concludes that the combined performance obligation is
satisfied over time. ABC could reach this conclusion on the basis of any one of
the following three analyses.
Analysis 1
ABC concludes that it satisfies the combined performance obligation over time
in accordance with the second over-time criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-27(b).
ABC concludes that as it performs the customization services it is creating an
asset for Customer. The resulting customized software will be used by
Customer for internal use; therefore, application development stage costs (e.g.
coding and testing of the software) will be capitalized by Customer in
accordance with Subtopic 350-40 as they are incurred. Consequently, ABC’s
performance in satisfying the combined performance obligation creates an
asset for Customer that Customer controls as it is being created/enhanced.
Analysis 2
ABC concludes that it satisfies the combined performance obligation over time
in accordance with the second over-time criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-27(b).
This is because Customer obtains control of a license to Product B (i.e.
Customer obtains a copy of Product B in its off-the-shelf form and could, if it
chose to do so, begin to use and benefit from the software immediately) before
ABC enhances that license through the agreed customizations, which
significantly increase the utility of the software to which Customer has rights
under the license.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         561
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Analysis 3
ABC concludes that it satisfies the combined performance obligation over time
based on meeting the third over-time criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-27(c).
Due to the specialized requests of Customer, the customized software, in its
completed state (i.e. when all of the customizations are completed and the
software is made available to Customer), does not have an alternative use to
ABC – i.e. ABC could not market the customized version of Product B to
another customer without substantive changes – and ABC has an enforceable
right to payment in the event Customer were to terminate the contract before
completing the performance obligation.



                  Question F201
                  Does an entity have an enforceable right to
                  payment if the contract does not explicitly state the
                  entity's right to payment upon contract
                  termination?
Interpretive response: Generally, no. We believe that when a contract's
written terms do not specify the entity's right to payment upon contract
termination, an enforceable right to payment is presumed not to exist. This is
consistent with the FASB staff views discussed at the June 26, 2018 Private
Company Council meeting.
We believe this presumption (that an enforceable right to payment does not
exist) also applies to non-cancellable contracts when there are no written terms
to specify the entity’s right to payment if the customer breaches the contract.
However, if the entity asserts that it has an enforceable right to payment for
performance completed to date in these circumstances, to overcome this
presumption, we would expect an entity to do the following.
— Support its assertion (that it has an enforceable right to payment) based on
  legislation, administrative practice or legal precedent that confers upon the
  entity a right to payment for performance completed to date. This analysis
  should demonstrate that an enforceable right to payment exists in the
  relevant jurisdiction.
— Assess whether relevant legal precedent indicates that similar rights to
  payment for performance completed to date in similar contracts have no
  binding legal effect.
The fact that the entity may have a basis for making a claim against the
counterparty in a court of law would not on its own be sufficient to support that
there is an enforceable right to payment as discussed in Question F202.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         562
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F202
                  Does the entity’s ability and intent to sue if the
                  customer terminates the contract indicate that it
                  has an enforceable right to payment?
Interpretive response: Not necessarily. The key evaluation is whether an entity
has an enforceable right to payment. When a right to payment on termination is
not specified in the contract with the customer, an entity may presume that the
enforceable right does not exist (see Question F201). When evaluating whether
an entity may still have a right to payment or whether a stated right is
enforceable, an entity considers the relevant laws or regulations.
The fact that the entity may sue a customer who defaults or cancels a contract
for convenience does not in itself demonstrate that the entity has an
enforceable right to payment. However, in some circumstances an entity might
need to go to court to enforce its existing right to payment.
Factors to consider when determining if an entity has a right to payment
include:
— relevant laws and regulations – laws and regulations can confer a right to
  payment even though such a right is not specified in a contract;
— customary business practices – an entity’s intent not to enforce a right to
  payment provision typically does not negate the existence of the right;
  however, a customary practice of not enforcing similar rights may indicate
  that the right is not enforceable under the law in the appropriate legal
  jurisdiction;
— the legal environment;
— relevant legal precedents – legal precedent could indicate whether a right to
  payment clause in a contract has binding legal effect; and
— legal opinions on the enforceability of rights (see Question F203).
Each individual factor may not be determinative on its own. An entity needs to
determine which factors are relevant for its specific set of circumstances. In
cases of uncertainty – e.g. when the above factors are inconclusive or provide
contradictory evidence about the existence of a right to payment – an entity
considers all relevant factors and applies judgment in reaching its conclusion.



                  Question F203
                  Does an entity need to obtain a legal opinion to
                  assess whether it has an enforceable right to
                  payment?
Interpretive response: An entity may have an apparent right to payment
described in its contract with the customer or under a relevant law or
regulation, but there may be uncertainty over whether the right is enforceable.
This may be the case when there is no legal precedent for the enforceability of
the entity’s right.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         563
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




For example, in a rising property market an entity may choose not to enforce its
right to payment in the event of customer default because it prefers to recover
the property and resell it at a higher price. A practice of not enforcing an
apparent right to payment may result in uncertainty over whether the
contractual right remains enforceable.
In such cases, an entity may need a legal opinion to help it assess whether it
has an enforceable right to payment. However, all facts and circumstances
need to be considered in assessing how much weight (if any) to place on the
legal opinion. This may include an assessment of:
— the quality of the opinion – i.e. strength of the supporting legal arguments;
— whether there are conflicting opinions provided by different legal experts;
  and
— whether there are conflicting legal precedents for similar cases.



                  Question F204
                  Can an enforceable right to payment exist for a
                  contract priced at a loss when an entity is not
                  entitled to cost plus a margin for performance
                  completed to date?
Interpretive response: Yes. We believe an entity can have an enforceable right
to payment for performance completed when, at contract inception, the
contract is priced at a loss.
In assessing whether an enforceable right to payment exists, the entity
considers whether it would be entitled to an amount that at least compensates
the entity for its performance completed to date in the event of contract
termination. This includes an amount that approximates the selling price of the
goods or services transferred to date – e.g. recovery of the costs incurred plus a
reasonable profit margin.
If the entity is entitled to a proportional amount of the contract price in a
contract priced at a loss, we believe that proportional amount would
approximate the selling price of the goods or services transferred to date even
if that amount is less than costs incurred to date because it is a proportion of
the expected price in the contract. We believe the guidance in paragraph 606-
10-55-11 that states “for example, recovery of the costs incurred … plus a
reasonable profit margin” does not preclude a loss contract from having an
enforceable right to payment. That is, a ‘reasonable profit margin’ could be the
loss margin intended at contract inception.
Further, the basis for conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC142) describes the right
to payment criterion as providing economic protection to the entity from the risk
of customer termination, which we believe is achieved if the customer is
required to pay the relative proportion of the contract price for performance
completed to date in the event of contract termination.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         564
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F210
                  How do customer acceptance provisions affect
                  whether a performance obligation is satisfied over
                  time?
Interpretive response: Customer acceptance may alter the conclusion that
otherwise would have been reached as to whether a performance obligation is
satisfied over time. The following table highlights a number of customer-
acceptance related scenarios and their effect on whether a performance
obligation is satisfied over time.

            If …                                   Then …                                  For example …

    1       There is substantive                   Customer acceptance                     The customer acceptance
            uncertainty about                      provisions will preclude                clause is based on
            whether the entity will                recognizing revenue                     meeting customer-
            meet the customer                      over time                               specific criteria and the
            acceptance provisions                                                          entity does not have
                                                                                           relevant history of
                                                                                           meeting substantially
                                                                                           similar criteria
    2       There are substantive                  Customer acceptance                     The customer wants to
            customer-acceptance                    may mean that a right                   ensure that if the contract
            provisions related to                  to payment for                          is terminated before
            work-in-process in the                 performance                             completion, it can make
            event of customer                      completed to date is                    use of the work-in-
            termination                            not enforceable (i.e.                   process
                                                   because the customer
                                                   might not accept the
                                                   work-in-process)
    3       The entity has                         Customer acceptance                     The entity’s standard
            significant experience                 generally will not affect               contracts include
            meeting similar                        whether the                             customer acceptance
            acceptance provisions                  performance obligation                  provisions even when the
                                                   is satisfied over time                  services are relatively
                                                                                           non-complex and/or
                                                                                           standard to the entity’s
                                                                                           arrangements




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The customer acceptance provisions in Topic 606 are generally consistent with
legacy US GAAP. A software entity’s considerations under Topic 606 in
determining whether it can objectively determine that a good or service meets
the agreed-upon specifications in the contract should not differ in any significant
manner from that entity’s considerations when applying the legacy US GAAP
software guidance (paragraphs 985-605-55-80 and 55-81) and SEC guidance
(SEC SAB Topic 13).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         565
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F212
                  How does a software entity account for additional
                  fees identified through an audit of customer usage?
Interpretive response: It depends. Software licenses often have contractual
provisions entitling the licensor to audit a customer's use of the IP to identify
usage that is beyond the scope of what is allowed in the contract or to ensure
the customer is properly reporting its royalty payments.
The primary issue is the timing of when the fees from the audit should be
recorded. This includes audits after the balance sheet date but before the
financial statements are issued (available to be issued), which means that the
guidance in Topic 855 (subsequent events) is relevant.
To determine the appropriate accounting, the entity starts by determining
whether the additional usage is an additional license or a sales- or usage-based
royalty subject to the royalty exception (see Question C390).
Additional license
The original license agreement may include options for the customer to
purchase additional user licenses on the same terms and conditions as the
original license. In that case, the customer obtains control of the additional user
licenses through exercise of its contractual option, and the entity will be entitled
to additional consideration. If the customer does not issue a purchase order or
notify the entity, it does not change the entity’s enforceable rights to the
consideration.
In contrast, if the original license does not include options, the entity may not
have an enforceable right when the unauthorized usage occurs.
Original license includes options
If an audit has not occurred, we believe an entity generally should not record an
estimate of additional unknown licenses at the end of each period unless there
is:
— an established history of customers with contractual options adding user
  licenses and not communicating those additions timely; or
— information about a particular customer that provides the entity with the
  ability to estimate.
This approach is consistent with the additional consideration being variable
consideration, similar to an unpriced change or contract claim (see Chapter G –
Contract modifications). In considering the variable consideration guidance
(including the constraint), absent the history or specific customer information,
the estimate would generally be zero. In contrast, when a history or specific
information exists, that information provides a basis for the entity to include an
amount in the transaction price when considering the variable consideration
guidance (including the constraint).
When the entity performs an audit after the balance sheet date but before the
financial statements are issued (available to be issued), it needs to consider
whether the audit gives rise to a recognized or unrecognized subsequent event




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         566
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




under Topic 855. For a more detailed discussion of subsequent events, see
chapter 9 of KPMG Handbook, Financial statement presentation.
When the original agreement includes options, and the rights are enforceable at
the balance sheet date, we believe the audit should be considered a recognized
subsequent event, and the additional fees recognized in the period of usage of
the license. This is because the audit confirms the condition that existed at the
balance sheet date – i.e. the enforceable right to the consideration.
Original license does not include options
When the original contract does not provide the right to acquire additional
licenses or specific monetary remedies for unauthorized use, the entity needs
to evaluate whether enforceable rights and obligations exist when the contract
does not specifically address this use. In performing this evaluation, we believe
entities should consider Question B60, which discusses a continuation of
service after a contract has expired.
In a scenario with unauthorized use, we believe that a customer generally will
need to agree to a new contract after the audit is concluded for revenue to be
recognized, because the nature of the transaction calls into question whether
the contract existence criteria are met (see Chapter B – Step 1: Identify the
contract with the customer). Specifically, there is uncertainty about the
customer's commitment to its contractual obligations and the collectibility of
any license fees not paid upfront. Therefore, no revenue is recognized until that
event occurs.
Similarly, if a contract does not exist at the balance sheet date, the contract
entered into after the balance sheet date but before the financial statements
are issued (available for issuance) is a nonrecognized subsequent event. This is
because the new contract represents new facts and circumstances; it does not
confirm a condition that existed at the balance sheet date.
Sales- or usage-based royalty
As discussed in Question F350, if the consideration to which the entity is
entitled from a sales- or usage-based royalty is not known in time for an entity’s
financial reporting, the entity estimates the royalties to which it is entitled using
the model for estimating variable consideration. When the additional usage is
subject to the royalty exception, the results of the audit will likely cause an
entity to adjust its estimate of the royalties earned.
If the audit occurs after the balance sheet date but before the financial
statements are issued (available for issuance), the entity considers Topic 855 to
evaluate whether information gained from an audit results in a recognized or
nonrecognized subsequent event. Generally, when the audit confirms usage
that occurred before the end of the reporting period, the audit is considered a
recognized event. This is because it confirms a condition or estimate that
existed on the balance sheet date – i.e. the estimated amount of usage that
already occurred.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         567
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                   Example F212.1
                   User license audits
On January 1, Year 1, Software Co entered into a license agreement with
Customer. The agreement gives Customer the right for 500 users to use
Software Co's proprietary software at a price of $100 per user.
Under the license agreement, Customer may purchase additional user licenses,
subject to the same terms and conditions as the original user licenses, for
$100 per user. Without purchasing additional user licenses, usage of the
software by more than 500 users is prohibited and is considered noncompliance
with the contract (and potentially piracy).
Each user represents a separate license. Because the price per additional user
license equals the price of the original user licenses, the option to acquire
additional user licenses does not provide Customer with a material right.
Software Co has contractual audit rights related to Customer's use of its
software.
The dates in the following scenarios are all in Year 1.
Scenario 1: Audit is a recognized subsequent event
On June 1, Customer allows 100 additional users to begin using the software
(i.e. there are now a total of 600 users), but does not communicate this to
Software Co. On July 15, Software Co performs a license audit and identifies
the additional users. On August 15, Customer issues a purchase order for
$10,000 for the amount owed for the additional user licenses.
In this scenario, Customer obtained control of the 100 additional user licenses
on June 1. At that date, Customer has already obtained (1) a copy of the
software and (2) the ability to use and benefit from those additional user
licenses. Customer also had a contractual right to obtain the licenses.
Software Co prepares financial statements for the period ending June 30 that
are issued on July 30. The audit on July 15, occurs before the financial
statements are issued (available for issuance). The audit provides information
about a recognized subsequent event because Customer obtained control of
the 100 additional user licenses on June 1 through exercise of its contractual
option.
Therefore, the revenue for the 100 additional user licenses is recognized in
Software Co's June 30 financial statements. As a next step, Software Co needs
to consider whether there is a history of concessions that may indicate the
additional fee is variable and consider the guidance on variable consideration.
Scenario 2: Audit is an unrecognized subsequent event
Assume the same facts as Scenario 1, except that Software Co does not
undertake license audits regularly and does not audit Customer before the
June 30 financial statements are issued (made available for issuance).
Further, historically Software Co's customers do not add user licenses without
communicating their take-down of such licenses timely. Software Co’s license
audits rarely uncover significant unreported license usage.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         568
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Software Co considers the variable consideration guidance and does not
recognize estimated additional license revenue in its June 30 financial
statements. This decision is based on the following reasons.
— No subsequent event has occurred – i.e. no license audit occurs before the
  financial statements are issued (made available for issuance).
— Software Co's lack of history of additional licenses not being
  communicated, or specific information suggesting an issue with this
  contract, indicates that the amount of additional license revenue for
  unreported licenses to which Software is entitled through the second
  quarter of Year 1 is $0.
If Software Co had different historical information, or contract-specific
information that pointed to additional licenses, it would likely be appropriate for
Software to estimate (subject to the constraint) the revenue to which it expects
to be entitled for the user licenses Customer added, but did not communicate,
as of June 30.
Scenario 3: Additional users not allowed under original contract
Assume the same basic facts as Scenario 1, except that the license agreement
does not allow Customer to obtain additional users. Therefore, use of the
software by more than 500 Customer users is a violation of the agreement. To
increase its user licenses, Customer must enter into a new contract with
Software Co.
On June 1, Customer violates the agreement by providing 100 additional users
(making 600 users in total) access to Software Co’s software. On July 15,
Software performs a license audit and identifies the additional users.
On August 15, Customer and Software Co reach an agreement under which
Customer will pay for the additional 100 user licenses. Accordingly, Customer
issues a purchase order for $10,000 and Software Co formally grants 100
additional user licenses.
Software Co concludes that no contract exists until the additional license
amendment is agreed on August 15. This is because it lacks evidence that
Customer is committed to its obligations or that Software will grant Customer
the license until the final terms are agreed. Therefore, Software does not
recognize revenue until that date. The audit does not confirm an event that
existed at the balance sheet date – the contract for the additional user licenses
did not yet exist.



                   Question F216
                   How does a software entity recognize fees
                   associated with a settlement with a non-customer
                   who used the entity’s software without obtaining a
                   license?
Background: A software entity may identify instances in which non-customers
are using its software without first obtaining a valid license. In these instances,
the software entity may subsequently enter into a contractual arrangement with



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         569
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




the non-customers thereby granting them a license for future use while also
incorporating compensation for the past use of the software into the overall fee.
For example, the parties enter into a three-year license at beginning of Year 2
that retroactively covers Year 1 and continues through the end of Year 3.
Question B60 provides guidance for different situations where the entity
continues to provide services after a contract expired to a customer that
previously obtained a license for software (i.e. for situations when the previous
use is authorized).
Interpretive response: The accounting for this type of contract will include
considering:
— Contract existence – When an unauthorized user has not previously been
  a customer, we believe the considerations about contract existence are
  generally consistent with those in other new customer scenarios. However,
  the new customer's previous unauthorized use (i.e. infringement) of the
  entity's software may suggest there is uncertainty about the customer's
  commitment to its contractual obligations (ASC 606-10-25-1(a)) and the
  collectibility of license fees not paid upfront (ASC 606-10-25-1(e)).
— Settlement amounts – Consistent with Question A60, the license fee
  (including amounts attributable to 'past due license fees') should be
  distinguished from a 'settlement payment' agreed to by the third party to
  incent the software entity to forgo some or all of its legal rights or remedies
  for the past infringement. A 'settlement payment' excluded from the
  revenue contract is recognized at the point at which the vendor becomes
  entitled to it (realized or realizable – i.e. final settlement reached) in
  accordance with ASC 450-30 (gain contingencies). See Question A60 for
  discussion on identifying a settlement payment.
Once the software entity has allocated consideration to the settlement amount
and the license fees, the amount allocated to the license fee is accounted for
under Topic 606. When the license is distinct from other goods or services,
fees allocated to the license would be recognized at the point in time the
customer obtains control of the license which would be the date the contract is
entered into because the customer has (1) a copy of the software and (2) the
right to use and benefit from the software.
When the contract has performance obligations satisfied over time in addition
to a distinct license (e.g. PCS) or only has a single performance obligation
satisfied over time, we believe the software entity should generally recognize
the entire fee allocated to the over-time performance obligation over the
remaining service period (i.e. prospectively). This would be the case regardless
of whether the contract indicated the fees were for previous periods because
the software entity did not 'perform' during the earlier year(s) of the
arrangement – i.e. it had neither granted the license, nor was it standing ready
to provide the customer (then an unauthorized user of the software) with PCS.
There may be limited instances in which a cumulative effect approach may also
be appropriate. For example, when the license and integral updates (see
Question C170) are combined into a single over-time performance obligation
and the customer has consumed and received the benefit of that combined
performance obligation before entering into the contract, a cumulative effect
approach may be appropriate.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         570
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Measuring progress toward complete satisfaction
of a performance obligation satisfied over time

                 Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• > Measuring Progress toward Complete Satisfaction of a Performance
Obligation
25-31 For each performance obligation satisfied over time in accordance with
paragraphs 606-10-25-27 through 25-29, an entity shall recognize revenue over
time by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of that
performance obligation. The objective when measuring progress is to depict an
entity’s performance in transferring control of goods or services promised to a
customer (that is, the satisfaction of an entity’s performance obligation).
25-32 An entity shall apply a single method of measuring progress for each
performance obligation satisfied over time, and the entity shall apply that
method consistently to similar performance obligations and in similar
circumstances. At the end of each reporting period, an entity shall remeasure
its progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation satisfied
over time.
• • > Methods for Measuring Progress
25-33 Appropriate methods of measuring progress include output methods and
input methods. Paragraphs 606-10-55-16 through 55-21 provide guidance for
using output methods and input methods to measure an entity’s progress
toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation. In determining the
appropriate method for measuring progress, an entity shall consider the nature
of the good or service that the entity promised to transfer to the customer.
25-34 When applying a method for measuring progress, an entity shall exclude
from the measure of progress any goods or services for which the entity does
not transfer control to a customer. Conversely, an entity shall include in the
measure of progress any goods or services for which the entity does transfer
control to a customer when satisfying that performance obligation.
25-35 As circumstances change over time, an entity shall update its measure
of progress to reflect any changes in the outcome of the performance
obligation. Such changes to an entity’s measure of progress shall be accounted
for as a change in accounting estimate in accordance with Subtopic 250-10 on
accounting changes and error corrections.
• • > Reasonable Measures of Progress
25-36 An entity shall recognize revenue for a performance obligation satisfied
over time only if the entity can reasonably measure its progress toward
complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. An entity would not be
able to reasonably measure its progress toward complete satisfaction of a
performance obligation if it lacks reliable information that would be required to
apply an appropriate method of measuring progress.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         571
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




25-37 In some circumstances (for example, in the early stages of a contract),
an entity may not be able to reasonably measure the outcome of a
performance obligation, but the entity expects to recover the costs incurred in
satisfying the performance obligation. In those circumstances, the entity shall
recognize revenue only to the extent of the costs incurred until such time that
it can reasonably measure the outcome of the performance obligation.
• > Methods for Measuring Progress toward Complete Satisfaction of a
Performance Obligation
55-16 Methods that can be used to measure an entity’s progress toward
complete satisfaction of a performance obligation satisfied over time in
accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-27 through 25-29 include the following:
a. Output methods (see paragraphs 606-10-55-17 through 55-19)
b. Input methods (see paragraphs 606-10-55-20 through 55-21).
• • > Output Methods
55-17 Output methods recognize revenue on the basis of direct
measurements of the value to the customer of the goods or services
transferred to date relative to the remaining goods or services promised under
the contract. Output methods include methods such as surveys of
performance completed to date, appraisals of results achieved, milestones
reached, time elapsed, and units produced or units delivered. When an entity
evaluates whether to apply an output method to measure its progress, the
entity should consider whether the output selected would faithfully depict the
entity’s performance toward complete satisfaction of the performance
obligation. An output method would not provide a faithful depiction of the
entity’s performance if the output selected would fail to measure some of the
goods or services for which control has transferred to the customer. For
example, output methods based on units produced or units delivered would
not faithfully depict an entity’s performance in satisfying a performance
obligation if, at the end of the reporting period, the entity’s performance has
produced work in process or finished goods controlled by the customer that
are not included in the measurement of the output.
55-18 As a practical expedient, if an entity has a right to consideration from a
customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value to the
customer of the entity’s performance completed to date (for example, a
service contract in which an entity bills a fixed amount for each hour of service
provided), the entity may recognize revenue in the amount to which the entity
has a right to invoice.
55-19 The disadvantages of output methods are that the outputs used to
measure progress may not be directly observable and the information required
to apply them may not be available to an entity without undue cost. Therefore,
an input method may be necessary.
• • > Input Methods
55-20 Input methods recognize revenue on the basis of the entity’s efforts or
inputs to the satisfaction of a performance obligation (for example, resources
consumed, labor hours expended, costs incurred, time elapsed, or machine
hours used) relative to the total expected inputs to the satisfaction of that
performance obligation. If the entity’s efforts or inputs are expended evenly



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        572
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




throughout the performance period, it may be appropriate for the entity to
recognize revenue on a straight-line basis.
55-21 A shortcoming of input methods is that there may not be a direct
relationship between an entity’s inputs and the transfer of control of goods or
services to a customer. Therefore, an entity should exclude from an input
method the effects of any inputs that, in accordance with the objective of
measuring progress in paragraph 606-10-25-31, do not depict the entity’s
performance in transferring control of goods or services to the customer. For
instance, when using a cost-based input method, an adjustment to the
measure of progress may be required in the following circumstances:
a. When a cost incurred does not contribute to an entity’s progress in
   satisfying the performance obligation. For example, an entity would not
   recognize revenue on the basis of costs incurred that are attributable to
   significant inefficiencies in the entity’s performance that were not reflected
   in the price of the contract (for example, the costs of unexpected amounts
   of wasted materials, labor, or other resources that were incurred to satisfy
   the performance obligation).
b. When a cost incurred is not proportionate to the entity’s progress in
   satisfying the performance obligation. In those circumstances, the best
   depiction of the entity’s performance may be to adjust the input method to
   recognize revenue only to the extent of that cost incurred. For example, a
   faithful depiction of an entity’s performance might be to recognize revenue
   at an amount equal to the cost of a good used to satisfy a performance
   obligation if the entity expects at contract inception that all of the following
   conditions would be met:
       1. The good is not distinct.
       2. The customer is expected to obtain control of the good significantly
          before receiving services related to the good.
       3. The cost of the transferred good is significant relative to the total
          expected costs to completely satisfy the performance obligation.
       4. The entity procures the good from a third party and is not significantly
          involved in designing and manufacturing the good (but the entity is
          acting as a principal in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-55-36
          through 55-40).


For each performance obligation that is satisfied over time, an entity applies a
single method of measuring progress toward complete satisfaction of the
obligation. The objective is to depict the transfer of control of the goods or
services to the customer. To do this, an entity selects an appropriate output or
input method. It then applies that method consistently to similar performance
obligations and in similar circumstances.

  Method            Description                                                 Examples
  Output            Based on direct measurements of the                         — Surveys of performance to
                    value to the customer of goods or                                  date
                    services transferred to date, relative                      — Appraisals of results
                    to the remaining goods or services                                 achieved
                    that are part of the performance                            — Milestones reached
                    obligation                                                  — Time elapsed




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         573
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




  Method            Description                                                 Examples
  Input             Based on an entity’s efforts or inputs                      —      Resources consumed
                    toward satisfying a performance                             —      Costs incurred
                    obligation, relative to the total                           —      Time-based
                    expected inputs to the satisfaction of                      —      Labor hours expended
                    that performance obligation
                                                                                —      Machine hours used


Topic 606 requires an entity to select a method that is consistent with the
objective of depicting its performance. An entity therefore does not have a free
choice of which method to apply to a given performance obligation – it needs to
consider the nature of the good or service that it promised to transfer to the
customer. While the standard requires an entity to update its estimates related
to the measure of progress selected, it does not allow for a change in methods.
A performance obligation is accounted for under the method selected (input or
output method) until the performance obligation has been fully satisfied.
Further, the standard requires that the selected method be applied to similar
contracts in similar circumstances.
When evaluating which method of measuring progress depicts the transfer of
control of a good or service, the entity’s ability to apply that method reliably may
also be relevant. For example, the information required to use an output
method may not be directly observable or may require undue cost to obtain – in
these circumstances, an input method may be appropriate.

Considerations for output methods
An output method may not provide a faithful depiction of performance if the
output method selected fails to measure some of the goods or services for
which control has transferred to the customer.
For example, if at the reporting date an entity’s performance has produced work
in progress or finished goods that are controlled by the customer, then using an
output method based on units produced or units delivered as it has been
applied historically would distort the entity’s performance. This is because it
would not recognize revenue for the assets that are created before delivery or
before production is complete but that are controlled by the customer.
[ASU 2014-09.BC165]

If control transfers to the customer over time, then the measure of progress
should reflect this. Therefore, although Topic 606 lists milestones achieved as
an example of a possible measure of progress when using an output method, it
remains necessary to consider whether the milestones faithfully depict
performance, particularly if the milestones are widely spaced. This is because
the premise underlying satisfaction of a performance obligation over time is that
control generally transfers continuously as the entity performs rather than at
discrete points in time. As a result, a milestone method would typically need to
incorporate a measure of progress between milestone achievements to
faithfully depict an entity’s performance.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         574
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Combined performance obligations
Selecting a single measure of progress may be difficult when a single
performance obligation contains multiple promised goods or services that will
be transferred over different periods of time. For example, this might occur
when a performance obligation combines a software license or SaaS and
professional services, or a software license and a SaaS element or a right to
unspecified updates, upgrades or enhancements. Significant judgment may be
required in some circumstances, and understanding the nature of the entity’s
overall promise to the customer is key for the entity to select a reasonable
measure of progress in these circumstances.
Significant difficulty selecting a single measure of progress may suggest the
entity should reconsider its assessment of the performance obligations – i.e.
the entity should consider whether there are multiple performance obligations
rather than a single performance obligation. Nevertheless, just because the
identification of a single measure of progress is challenging does not
necessarily mean by itself that the promised goods or services are not a single
performance obligation.


Time-based measures of progress
Use of a time-elapsed output measure of progress or a time-based input
measure of progress will generally result in a straight-line attribution of revenue
(e.g. a time-elapsed or time-based measure of progress would result in straight-
line recognition of the revenue attributable to a three-year SaaS performance
obligation) – i.e. excluding the potential effects of variable consideration that
may mean equal revenue is not recognized each period for a performance
obligation satisfied over time.
A time-elapsed output measure of progress is appropriate when direct
measurements of the value to the customer evidence that the customer
obtains generally equal benefit from the service (including SaaS) throughout the
service period.
A time-based input measure of progress is appropriate when the entity’s inputs
(e.g. costs or efforts) are incurred evenly over time. This may be the case, for
example, when the entity’s costs to provide a service (e.g. technical support in
a software licensing arrangement or access to a hosted software application or
platform) are fixed and not dependent on how much the customer uses the
service (e.g. how many support calls the customer makes or how much the
customer makes use of the hosted software).

Stand-ready obligations
Judgment is required to determine an appropriate measure of progress for a
stand-ready obligation. A time-based measure of progress will frequently be
appropriate for recognizing revenue for a stand-ready obligation, including a
performance obligation to provide when-and-if available software updates,
upgrades and enhancements. However, that will not always be the case. The
TRG, at its January 2015 meeting, discussed an example of an annual contract
to provide snow removal services in an area where snowfall is seasonal,
concluding that a straight-line basis of recognition would not be appropriate



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         575
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




because the pattern of benefit of these services, as well as the entity’s effort to
fulfill the performance obligation, would not generally be even throughout the
year because snow is only expected in the late fall/winter. That is, the revenue
attributable to this performance obligation would likely be recognized entirely (or
almost entirely) during the November through March period of the annual
contract when the service provider has equipment and crews on standby to
address snowfall. Question F220 describes the circumstances in which it would
generally not be appropriate to use a time-based measure of progress for a
performance obligation to provide technical support services or when-and-if
available software updates, upgrades and enhancements.
When making the judgment, an entity considers the substance of the stand-
ready obligation to ensure that the measure of progress aligns with the nature
of the underlying promise. In assessing the nature of the obligation, the entity
considers all relevant facts and circumstances, including the timing of transfer
of goods or services, and whether the entity’s efforts (i.e. costs) are expended
evenly throughout the period covered by the stand-ready obligation.


‘As-invoiced’ practical expedient
As a practical expedient, if an entity has a right to invoice a customer at an
amount that corresponds directly with the value to the customer of the entity’s
performance to date, then it can recognize revenue at that amount. For
example, in a services contract an entity may have the right to bill a fixed
amount for each unit of service provided. [606-10-55-18]
This practical expedient is an expedient to parts of Step 3, 4 and 5 of the
Topic 606 revenue model. Revenue is recognized on the basis of invoicing and
revenue is recognized based on the price multiplied by the measure of progress
(quantities or units transferred). An entity that uses this practical expedient
bypasses determining a transaction price (Step 3), allocating the transaction
price to performance obligations (Step 4) and determining when to recognize
revenue (Step 5).
The determination of whether the invoice amount represents equivalent value
to the customer may be more difficult in scenarios with multiple performance
obligations or where the fixed amount per unit changes over time. This might
occur with contracts that have declining unit prices, rates with forward market
curves, rates with contractual minimums or contracts with volume rebates. In
these cases, judgment is required to determine whether the changes in pricing
are in response to a change in the underlying value to the customer.
If a contract includes fixed fees in addition to per-unit invoicing (whether paid
upfront or over time), substantive contractual minimums or payments to the
customer such as rebates, discounts or signing bonuses, then the use of the
practical expedient may be precluded because they cause the invoiced amounts
not to correspond to the value that the customer receives.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         576
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                   Observation

Topic 606 provides another pathway – i.e. other than the ‘as-invoiced’ practical
expedient – in accordance with which entities such as SaaS providers may not
be required to estimate transaction-based fees (at least not for the entire
contract period). Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the
performance obligations in the contract discusses the circumstances in which
an entity can allocate variable consideration within a performance obligation to
distinct goods or services that comprise the performance obligation (e.g. a
series of distinct months or quarters within a three-year SaaS arrangement).
We believe this guidance will generally provide a more viable pathway in more
circumstances for entities to recognize revenue resulting from usage- or
transaction-based fees (and similar) in the distinct service periods in which the
usage or transactions occur.


Adjusting the measure of progress
An entity applying an input method excludes the effects of any inputs that do
not depict its performance in transferring control of goods or services to the
customer. In particular, when using a cost-based input method – e.g. cost-to-
cost – an adjustment to the measure of progress may be required when an
incurred cost:
— does not contribute to an entity’s progress in satisfying the performance
  obligation – e.g. unexpected amounts of wasted materials, labor issues
  (e.g. initially assigning personnel to a task or activity that were not correct
  for that task or activity) or other resources (these costs are expensed as
  they are incurred); or
— is not proportionate to the entity’s progress in satisfying the performance
  obligation – e.g. uninstalled materials.
Generally, some level of inefficiency, rework or overrun is assumed in a
professional service or construction contract and an entity contemplates these
in the arrangement fee. Although Topic 606 specifies that unexpected amounts
of wasted materials, labor or other resources should be excluded from a cost-
to-cost measure of progress, it does not provide additional guidance on how to
identify unexpected costs. Judgment is therefore required to distinguish normal
wasted materials or inefficiencies from those that do not depict progress
toward completion. [ASU 2014-09.BC176–BC178]


Reasonable measure of progress
An entity may not be able to measure its progress if reliable information
required to apply an appropriate method of measuring progress is not available.
However, if the entity cannot reasonably measure the outcome, but expects to
recover the costs incurred in satisfying the performance obligation, then it
recognizes revenue to the extent of the costs incurred (i.e. a ‘zero-margin’
recognition method).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         577
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Input vs output measures
Legacy US GAAP (other than that applicable to construction-type and
production-type contracts) indicated that if a reliable measure of output could be
established, then it was generally the best measure of progress toward
completion; however, it acknowledged that output measures often cannot be
established, in which case input measures are used.
The Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 states the Boards’ view that an
output measure is, conceptually, the most faithful depiction of an entity’s
performance because it directly measures the value of the goods or services
transferred to the customer; however, Topic 606 does not require an output
measure be used, even if available, if an input method would also provide a
reasonable basis for measuring progress and it would be less costly to apply.
In general, we do not expect software entities will have to apply substantially
different measures of progress to their performance obligations than they did to
their elements under legacy US GAAP. For example, a software entity that
measured progress toward completion of its professional services or a software
customization project using a cost-to-cost or labor hours input method under
legacy US GAAP is likely able to continue that practice under Topic 606 in most
cases – assuming that the over-time criteria are met.
Revenue vs margin
Under legacy US GAAP for construction-type and production-type contracts, the
percentage-of-completion method was used to determine the amount of
revenue and costs to recognize, and there were two methods acceptable for
this determination.
— Alternative A provided a basis for recognizing costs in the financial
  statements earlier or later than when they are incurred.
— Alternative B allowed an entity to apply a margin to the costs incurred.
Topic 606 supersedes both of these methods. Topic 606 and Subtopic 340-40,
in general, separate the recognition of revenue from the recognition of contract
costs – i.e. while the legacy US GAAP construction-type and production-type
contract guidance was focused on margin, Topic 606 is not. However, if an
entity uses cost-to-cost as its measure of progress, then the amount of revenue
and costs recognized will be similar to the amounts recognized under
Alternative B in the legacy construction-type and production-type contract
guidance. Additionally, the margin expressed as a percentage of revenue will
generally remain constant throughout the contract. [605-35-25-70 – 25-81, 25-83 – 25-
84, ASU 2014-09.BC164]

Zero-margin recognition
If estimating the final outcome was impracticable, except to assure that no loss
would be incurred, then legacy US GAAP for construction-type and production-
type contracts recommended use of the percentage-of-completion method
based on a zero percent profit margin (rather than the completed-contract
method) until more precise estimates can be made. This scenario may arise if




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         578
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




the scope of the contract is ill-defined but the contractor is protected by a cost-
plus contract or other contractual terms.
This is consistent with the requirement in Topic 606 that revenue should be
recognized only to the extent of costs incurred – i.e. at a zero percent profit
margin – when the entity cannot reasonably measure its progress, but expects
to recover its costs to satisfy the performance obligation. However, Topic 606
and Subtopic 340-40 do not include guidance on the accounting for losses, and
therefore the existing guidance on onerous contracts remains applicable.
[605-35-25-60, 25-66 – 25-67]

A zero gross margin approach was applied in some software-specific
circumstances not contemplated by the guidance in legacy Subtopic 605-35
(e.g. when a contract includes services essential to the software’s functionality
and PCS or hosting services for which the entity did not have vendor-specific
objective evidence of fair value). Question F270 discusses measures of
progress for similar performance obligations – i.e. those that may combine
professional services and a right to receive unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements – under Topic 606.
Completed contract method
Under legacy US GAAP, an entity used the completed contract method when it
could not make reasonably dependable estimates for construction- and
production-type contracts in the scope of Subtopic 605-35. Under the
completed contract method, the entity deferred revenue and costs until the
contract was complete or substantially complete, other than to the extent it
was required to accrue an expected loss. [605-35-25-88 – 25-91]
The completed contract method as it existed under legacy US GAAP is not
permitted under Topic 606. Even though an entity may conclude, in infrequent
circumstances, that for some period of time after performance begins that it
cannot recognize revenue over time because it lacks reliable information that
would be required to apply an appropriate measure of progress, the entity
would not also defer contract costs as it does currently under the completed
contract method. The entity would expense its contract costs as incurred. That
the entity in that scenario cannot reliably measure progress toward satisfaction
of the performance obligation does not change the fact that the work in
progress is transferring continuously to the customer when one or more of the
over-time criteria are met.
There is no mechanism for deferral of contract costs under Topic 606 (or
Subtopic 340-40) for performance obligations satisfied over time, such as
occurs under the completed contract method in legacy US GAAP.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         579
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F220
                  When is it not appropriate to recognize revenue for
                  a technical support or unspecified updates/
                  upgrades/enhancements ‘stand-ready obligation’
                  on a straight-line basis?
Interpretive response:
Technical support
If technical support is a stand-ready obligation (see Question F150), a straight-
line measure of progress will typically be appropriate.
Unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements (or rights to use
unspecified additional software products)
Question C130 provides relevant considerations about when an obligation to
provide unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements is, or is not, a stand-
ready obligation and the circumstances in which a straight-line measure of
progress would not be appropriate to apply to such a performance obligation,
considerations which apply equally to an obligation to provide rights to use
unspecified additional software products. These include:
— if it is expected (based on an explicit promise to the customer or the
  entity’s customary business practice) that releases will always or
  predominantly occur at a specific time (or in a specified period – e.g. the
  fourth quarter) each year, an input-based measure, resulting in an other
  than straight-line revenue attribution and reflective of the uneven efforts
  that the entity will undertake to transfer the releases to the customer each
  year of the obligation period, may be appropriate.
— if it is expected at contract inception that there will be a significant upgrade
  or enhancement (that is not a specified upgrade or enhancement)
  transferred to the customer at a specific point in time during the support
  period (e.g. the software entity expects to release principally bug fixes and
  other minor updates throughout the support period, but also expects to
  release a significant enhancement or version upgrade 12 months after
  contract inception that will substantially enhance the licensed software), the
  benefit the customer will receive from the unspecified update, upgrade or
  enhancement provision may not be even throughout the obligation period.
  Therefore, a different measure of progress (i.e. other than one that is time-
  based) may be more appropriate.



                  Example F220.1
                  Time-based measure of progress for technical
                  support services
This is a continuation of Example F150.1.
ABC Corp. and Customer enter into a contract for Customer to license Software
Product H and for ABC to provide technical support for the full three-year




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         580
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




license period. The terms of the support agreement specify that ABC’s
helpdesk and web support operators are available from 8-5 each day other than
Sundays; while ABC’s web page providing support FAQs as other ‘helpful hints’
is available 24/7.
In Example F150.1, ABC concluded both that:
— the software license and the technical support services are separate
  performance obligations; and
— the technical support services are a ‘stand-ready obligation’ satisfied over
  time on the basis that Customer consumes and receives benefit from
  having access to ABC’s support resources, when and as needed,
  throughout the three-year support period as ABC performs by maintaining
  its support infrastructure (e.g. website, helpdesk) and making that available
  to Customer in accordance with the terms of the support agreement.
ABC further concludes that it will recognize revenue attributable to the technical
support obligation on a straight-line basis. A time-based measure of progress is
considered appropriate as the entity’s efforts to fulfill its stand-ready
performance obligation are generally expended evenly throughout the support
period – i.e. ABC’s principal efforts are those that occur continuously
throughout the support period to maintain the availability of the helpdesk,
support personnel and website.



                  Example F220.2
                  Time-based measure of progress appropriate for
                  unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements
ABC Corp. and Customer enter into a contract for Customer to license Software
Product H and for ABC to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements for the full three-year license period.
Based on the relevant facts and circumstances, ABC concludes that (i) the
software license and (ii) the unspecified update, upgrade and enhancement
rights are distinct from each other and, therefore, separate performance
obligations (see Question C170).
The distinct software license is satisfied at a point in time (see Question F20).
ABC has a relevant history of providing unspecified items to customers on a
regular basis; however, the quantity and the mix (i.e. bug fixes, updates or
upgrades/enhancements) of those items a customer will receive and the timing
of releases within a given period vary. Therefore, ABC concludes both that:
— the nature of its performance obligation to provide unspecified updates,
  upgrades and enhancements is a ‘stand-ready obligation’; and
— it expects to expend efforts to develop and transfer unspecified items to
  the customer on a generally even basis throughout the three-year term
  such that a time-based measure of progress, resulting in straight-line
  revenue recognition for the performance obligation, is appropriate.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         581
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Legacy US GAAP on recognizing revenue from specified and unspecified
upgrades has been superseded. However, the guidance applicable to these
performance obligations under Topic 606 is not expected to result in a
significant change in practice with respect to:
— measuring progress for performance obligations to provide when-and-if-
  available updates, upgrades and enhancements (i.e. assuming it is a stand-
  ready obligation); and
— identifying specified upgrades as performance obligations.
However, unlike legacy US GAAP, under which the entire arrangement
consideration was typically deferred until a specified upgrade was delivered (i.e.
because entities typically did not have vendor-specific objective evidence of fair
value for those specified upgrades), entities will only allocate a portion of the
transaction price to the specified upgrade and will generally recognize
revenue for the initial software license when control of that license transfers to
the customer.
The accounting for unspecified additional software products has also changed
under Topic 606. Under legacy US GAAP, a promise to provide unspecified
additional software products resulted in subscription accounting for the entire
software arrangement (i.e. because an entity could not establish vendor-specific
objective evidence of fair value for licenses to not-yet-developed software
products). In contrast, under Topic 606, most such rights will be distinct and
therefore the initial software license(s) will be accounted for separately (i.e. as a
separate performance obligation) from the unspecified additional software
product rights. Distinct unspecified additional software product rights will be
subject to the same considerations for determining an appropriate measure of
progress as a promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements.



                  Question F230
                  What is an appropriate measure of progress for a
                  combined performance obligation that includes a
                  software license and rights to unspecified updates,
                  upgrades and enhancements (and/or rights to use
                  unspecified additional software products)?
Interpretive response: Just as it is vital to determine the nature of the
combined performance obligation – i.e. to determine the nature of the overall
promise to the customer that includes the software license and the unspecified
update, upgrade and enhancement rights – when assessing if it is satisfied over
time (see Question F170), determining the nature of the combined performance
obligation is also vital to assigning an appropriate measure of progress to those
that are satisfied over time. The TRG discussed this concept at its July 2015
meeting and the members generally agreed that, in determining the nature of a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         582
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




combined performance obligation, an important consideration may be the
reason(s) why the entity decided that the goods or services are not distinct
from each other.
We believe that, in most cases, the nature of the entity’s overall promise to the
customer when the performance obligation includes a software license and
unspecified update, upgrade and enhancement rights (and/or rights to use
unspecified additional software products) is fundamentally an obligation to
provide the customer with ongoing access to the entity’s most current IP. This
is because the basis for the conclusion that the license and the unspecified
item rights are not distinct from each other in these cases is the integral nature
of the updates, upgrades, enhancements or additional software licenses to the
arrangement – i.e. typically, the basis for any conclusion that a software license
and rights to unspecified items are not distinct will be that the utility to the
customer of the initially transferred software will degrade significantly during
the license period if updates, upgrades or enhancements (and/or rights to use
additional software products) are not provided.
Consequently, we believe the measure of progress toward satisfaction of the
combined performance obligation will typically be driven by what an appropriate
measure of progress would be for the promise to provide the unspecified items if
it were evaluated on a stand-alone basis. For example, if the promise to provide
the unspecified items, if assessed on a stand-alone basis, would be considered a
stand-ready obligation satisfied over time (see Question F160) and that a time-
based measure of progress would be appropriate for that obligation if it were
distinct (see Question F220), it would generally be appropriate to apply the same
time-based measure of progress to the combined performance obligation.
While Topic 606 does not provide explicit guidance to this effect, we believe
Example 55 (paragraphs 606-10-55-364 – 55-366) supports the position in the
preceding paragraph as that example reaches its conclusion about the
appropriate measure of progress to apply to the combined performance
obligation on the basis of the entity’s expected efforts to develop and transfer
the updates and upgrades to the customer.
As outlined in Question F220, a time-based measure of progress will not always
be appropriate for a promise to provide unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements (or rights to use unspecified additional software products).




                 Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Example 55—License of Intellectual Property
55-364 An entity enters into a contract with a customer to license (for a
period of three years) intellectual property related to the design and
production processes for a good. The contract also specifies that the
customer will obtain any updates to that intellectual property for new designs
or production processes that may be developed by the entity. The updates
are integral to the customer’s ability to derive benefit from the license during




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         583
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




the license period because the intellectual property is used in an industry in
which technologies change rapidly.
55-365 The entity assesses the goods and services promised to the
customer to determine which goods and services are distinct in accordance
with paragraph 606-10-25-19. The entity determines that the customer can
benefit from (a) the license on its own without the updates and (b) the
updates together with the initial license. Although the benefit the customer
can derive from the license on its own (that is, without the updates) is limited
because the updates are integral to the customer’s ability to continue to use
the intellectual property in an industry in which technologies change rapidly,
the license can be used in a way that generates some economic benefits.
Therefore, the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(a) is met for the license
and the updates.
55-365A The fact that the benefit the customer can derive from the license
on its own (that is, without the updates) is limited (because the updates are
integral to the customer’s ability to continue to use the license in the rapidly
changing technological environment) also is considered in assessing whether
the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b) is met. Because the benefit that the
customer could obtain from the license over the three-year term without the
updates would be significantly limited, the entity’s promises to grant the
license and to provide the expected updates are, in effect, inputs that,
together fulfill a single promise to deliver a combined item to the customer.
That is, the nature of the entity’s promise in the contract is to provide
ongoing access to the entity’s intellectual property related to the design and
production processes for a good for the three-year term of the contract. The
promises within that combined item (that is, to grant the license and to
provide when-and-if available updates) are therefore not separately
identifiable in accordance with the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-19(b).
55-366 The nature of the combined good or service that the entity promised
to transfer to the customer is ongoing access to the entity’s intellectual
property related to the design and production processes for a good for the
three-year term of the contract. Based on this conclusion, the entity applies
paragraphs 606-10-25-23 through 25-30 to determine whether the single
performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time and
paragraphs 606-10-25-31 through 25-37 to determine the appropriate method
for measuring progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance
obligation. The entity concludes that because the customer simultaneously
receives and consumes the benefits of the entity’s performance as it occurs,
the performance obligation is satisfied over time in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-27(a) and that a time-based input measure of progress is
appropriate because the entity expects, on the basis of its relevant history
with similar contracts, to expend efforts to develop and transfer updates to
the customer on a generally even basis throughout the three-year term.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         584
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, a software license and PCS were accounted for as a
single element if the software entity did not have vendor-specific objective
evidence of fair value (VSOE) for the undelivered PCS element. The notion of
VSOE no longer exists; therefore, the population of arrangements that will be
accounted for as a single, combined performance obligation under Topic 606
will be considerably fewer than, and different from, the population of similar
arrangements accounted for as a single element under legacy US GAAP.
That being said, revenue recognition for a single, combined element comprised
of a license and PCS under legacy US GAAP and revenue recognition for a
combined performance obligation comprised of a license and a right to
unspecified items, when that occurs, are likely to be substantially similar. Under
legacy US GAAP, revenue for the combined element was recognized ratably
over the PCS period.
Similarly, we expect revenue for most combined performance obligations that
include a software license and rights to unspecified items will also be
recognized ratably over the period to which the customer has the right to
unspecified items.



                   Question F235
                   When should an entity begin to recognize revenue
                   for a ‘stand-ready’ service promised to a customer’s
                   customer?
Interpretive response: When the end customer has the ability to access and
begin to consume and benefit from the service.
This situation could arise when an entity sells a product (including a software
license) through a distributor or other intermediary but also promises, explicitly
or implicitly, to provide a service to the end customer (i.e. the customer’s
customer). For example, a software entity may enter into a licensing
arrangement with a reseller and also provide an online hosting service to the
reseller’s end customer. See Question C100 on identifying promises made to a
customer’s customer.
Careful consideration will need to be given to when control of the promised
service begins to transfer to the reseller or the reseller’s customer. In the case
of an online hosting or streaming service, typically the reseller’s customer is the
party who will benefit from access to the stand-ready service. And therefore,
control of the online hosting or streaming service does not begin to transfer
(and the software entity does not begin to recognize revenue for that
performance obligation) until the end customer can begin to consume and
benefit from the service (which is typically when the end customer obtains the
license).
If the entity does not have visibility into the distributor’s sales to specific end
customers, it may not be clear when the end customer has access to and has



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         585
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




the ability to consume and benefit from the stand-ready service. In those
scenarios, an entity generally will need to develop processes to estimate when
the products are sold through to end customers and the service period to the
end customer begins. We do not believe it would be appropriate to begin to
recognize service revenue when the software license is transferred to the
distributor on the basis that the software company cannot reliably estimate
when the service period to the end customer begins; rather, we believe a
reasonable estimate must be made. Oftentimes, it will be reasonable for the
estimate to be based on available sell-through data for a portfolio of similar
transactions.



                  Question F240
                  What is an appropriate measure of progress for a
                  combined performance obligation comprised of
                  software-as-a-service and professional services?
Interpretive response: The circumstances addressed by this question – i.e. a
combined performance obligation comprises SaaS and professional services
that are not distinct from each other – should be distinguished from the more
common circumstance where SaaS and professional services are separate
performance obligations. This question does not address the latter
circumstance.
When evaluating a combined performance obligation, determining the nature of
that performance obligation is vital to both (1) determining whether a
performance obligation is satisfied over time and (2) assigning an appropriate,
single measure of progress to those that are satisfied over time.
The nature of the entity’s overall promise to the customer in a SaaS
arrangement is to provide the customer with the service of access to its hosted
application – i.e. the entire purpose of a SaaS arrangement is to permit the
customer to access the SaaS provider’s hosted application or platform. We do
not believe that this conclusion changes when professional services are
provided, typically upfront, that are not distinct from the SaaS offering. Question
C280 discusses the circumstances in which the SaaS offering and related
professional services (e.g. customization or implementation services) that are
not ‘set-up activities’ (see Question C220) are not distinct from each other.
It is also important that, typically, the basis for concluding that a SaaS
performance obligation is satisfied over time is that the customer consumes
and receives benefit throughout the contract period from the SaaS provider’s
performance of providing access to its hosted software – i.e. the customer in a
SaaS arrangement benefits throughout the arrangement period from having the
ability to access the hosted software as needed.
In view of the two preceding paragraphs, we believe the single measure of
progress toward complete satisfaction of the combined performance obligation
will typically be driven by what an appropriate measure of progress would be for
the promise to provide the SaaS if it were evaluated on a stand-alone basis.
Thus, we believe a time-based measure of progress will typically be
appropriate, recognizing revenue over the period the customer has the ability to




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         586
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




consume and receive benefit from its access to the SaaS. This means an entity
would generally not begin to recognize revenue on the combined performance
obligation before the customer ‘goes live’ – i.e. even if the non-distinct
professional services commence (and even if they are completed) before the
‘go-live’ date, no revenue generally should be recognized on the combined
performance obligation before the go-live date. The transaction price allocated
to the combined performance obligation will, therefore, be recognized over the
SaaS period beginning from the go-live date.
Topic 606 does not provide explicit guidance to this effect. However, an example
of SaaS and non-distinct professional services (performed upfront) was discussed
by the TRG at its July 2015 meeting. While there were some differences of view
about some aspects of that example, TRG members generally agreed with the
view of the FASB and IASB staffs that the most appropriate measure of progress
was one based on the SaaS, with progress being measured over the SaaS period
from the go-live date such that no revenue would be recognized during the period
the professional services are performed.
Question H230 discusses the effect of using this measure of progress on the
accounting for fulfillment costs incurred before recognizing revenue on the
performance obligation.



                  Example F240.1
                  Software-as-a-service and non-distinct services
SaaS Provider enters into a contract with Customer to provide Customer with
access to its hosted research application for three years on a SaaS basis – i.e.
Customer does not have the right to take possession of the hosted software.
Customer needs access to a research tool that can meet certain specifications
before it can migrate from its legacy research tool. SaaS Provider agrees, as
part of the contract, to develop and implement the necessary additional search
functionality to its hosted application before Customer goes live with the
research tool in six months. SaaS Provider begins the customization efforts
immediately after contract inception.
SaaS Provider frequently sells access to its SaaS on a stand-alone basis (i.e.
without customization or other professional services) and has concluded that its
performance obligation to provide SaaS is satisfied over time on the basis that the
customer receives and consumes benefits from SaaS Provider’s performance of
providing access to the hosted application as SaaS Provider performs – i.e. the
customer benefits from having the research tool available to it whenever needed
during the arrangement period.
Consistent with Question C280, SaaS Provider concludes that the
customization services, which involve proprietary knowledge of and access to
its existing software code, and the SaaS offering in this contract are not distinct
from each other – i.e. they constitute a single, combined performance
obligation.
SaaS Provider concludes that the combined performance obligation is satisfied
over time on the same basis as it had previously concluded its SaaS offering,
when sold on a stand-alone basis, is satisfied over time. SaaS Provider then




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         587
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




concludes that a time-based measure of progress, with recognition of revenue
commencing at ‘go-live’, is appropriate for the following reasons.
— Even with the customization services being part of the contract, the
  fundamental nature of SaaS Provider’s promise to Customer is to provide
  Customer with access to its SaaS that meets Customer’s needs, which
  Customer consumes and receives benefit from on a generally equal basis
  throughout, and only during, the three-year period following the go-live
  date.
— Customer will not begin to consume and receive benefit from the SaaS
  before go-live – i.e. if go-live never came, Customer would have consumed
  and received no benefit from the contract, even if SaaS Provider had
  successfully customized the hosted application to Customer’s
  specifications.
— From the go-live date, SaaS Provider’s efforts to give Customer access to
  its hosted research application are expected to be even throughout the
  three-year period.
SaaS Provider concludes that its costs to customize its hosted SaaS application
are within the scope of Subtopic 350-40 on internal-use software.
Consequently, SaaS Provider follows the guidance in Subtopic 350-40 in
accounting for those costs.



                  Question F250
                  What is an appropriate measure of progress for a
                  ‘hybrid SaaS’ arrangement in which the on-premise
                  software license and the software-as-a-service
                  (SaaS) element are a single performance
                  obligation?
Interpretive response: Question C310 outlines how an entity should evaluate
whether the on-premise and SaaS elements are distinct from each other, and
therefore separate performance obligations, in hybrid SaaS (or hybrid cloud)
arrangements.
Similar to the analysis of Question F230, the determination of the measure of
progress for a combined performance obligation that includes an on-premise
software license and a SaaS element depends on determining the nature of the
entity’s overall promise to the customer, and important to that consideration
may be the reason(s) why the entity decided that the on-premise element(s)
and the SaaS element(s) are not distinct from each other.
We believe that, in most cases, the nature of the entity’s overall promise to the
customer when a combined performance obligation includes an on-premise
software element and a SaaS element – i.e. as described in Question C310, the
on-premise software element and the SaaS element are not distinct from each
other – is to provide access to a combined functionality that depends
significantly on both elements. This is because the basis for the conclusion that
the on-premise element and the SaaS element are not distinct from each other
in these cases is the integrated nature of the two elements’ functionalities – i.e.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         588
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




typically, the basis for any conclusion that an on-premise element (A) and a
SaaS element (B) are not distinct from each other will be that A and B depend
upon each other (i.e. work together) to provide combined functionalities that are
integral to the customer’s ability to derive its intended benefit from the hybrid
SaaS solution.
Consequently, consistent with most other ‘access-type’ performance
obligations (e.g. pure SaaS arrangements or distinct hosting services provided in
a software licensing arrangement), we believe a time-based measure of
progress will frequently be appropriate because the customer obtains generally
equal benefit from its access to the integrated offering throughout the
arrangement period and the entity’s efforts to provide that access (which,
typically, principally consist of its efforts to maintain availability to the customer
of the SaaS features – efforts to transfer the on-premise software license are
generally minimal).



                  Question F260
                  How should an entity measure progress in a
                  combined performance obligation satisfied over
                  time that includes a software license and software
                  customization (or complex implementation
                  services)?
Interpretive response: If a combined performance obligation that includes a
software license(s) and customization or complex implementation services is
satisfied over time (see Question F200), the performance period will conclude
at the point in time the services are complete. Because software licenses
provide customers with a right to use software (see Question F20), rather than
a right to access software, once the customization or complex implementation
services are complete, there is no further performance required of the
software entity – i.e. the performance obligation is completely satisfied.
This rationale was enumerated by the FASB in the Basis for Conclusions to
ASU 2016-10 (BC68).
Frequently, an appropriate measure of progress will be an input-based measure
such as one based on costs incurred as compared to total expected costs (i.e.
the cost-to-cost method) or labor hours incurred as compared to total expected
labor hours. While Topic 606 permits some flexibility in selecting a measure of
progress for performance obligations satisfied over time, that selection is not a
‘free choice’, the selection must reasonably reflect progress toward complete
satisfaction of the performance obligation. In software customization or
complex implementation scenarios, we generally would not expect a time-
based measure to reasonably reflect the likely uneven performance of the
services while output measures that provide ‘direct measurements of value to
the customer’ will not frequently be available.
When applying a cost-to-cost method, if the combined performance obligation
includes a third-party software license (i.e. the third-party license is not distinct),
the entity should consider the ‘uninstalled materials’ guidance in paragraph 606-
10-55-21(b). That is, it may be appropriate for the entity to recognize revenue to




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         589
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




the extent of the entity’s cost of the license if the criteria in that paragraph
are met.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

In general, it is likely entities accounting for combined performance obligations
of this nature that are satisfied over time will measure progress toward
complete satisfaction of those performance obligations similarly to how
software entities measured progress toward completion of similar contract
accounting elements under legacy US GAAP.
However, because the completed contract method, which used to be permitted
in some circumstances, is not permitted under Topic 606, entities that
previously applied that method to their combined software and essential
services elements (e.g. when unable to make dependable estimates of efforts
to complete) may see a change in their accounting for those combined
performance obligations (e.g. applying a zero margin approach).



                  Question F270
                  How should an entity measure progress in a
                  combined performance obligation satisfied over
                  time that includes both software customization and
                  rights to unspecified updates, upgrades and
                  enhancements?
Interpretive response: A software entity may enter into a software licensing
arrangement that includes both (1) customization and (2) rights to unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancements (and/or rights to use unspecified
additional software products) and for which both of those items are not distinct
from the software license. This may not be a frequent occurrence in a single
software license arrangement, but might occur in a contract for multiple
software licenses that are not distinct from each other (see Question C140)
wherein some of the software is significantly customized or modified, while
other applications upon which the ‘system’ (or ‘solution’) depends require
updates or upgrades to maintain their utility within the system.
Despite the potential complexity of the determination, Topic 606 requires the
entity to apply a single measure of progress to that combined performance
obligation. Regardless of how many promised goods or services comprise the
combined performance obligation, determining the nature of that combined
performance obligation remains pivotal to assessing both (1) whether the
performance obligation is satisfied over time and (2) an appropriate measure of
progress to apply to the performance obligation if it is satisfied over time. The
TRG discussed this concept at its July 2015 meeting and the members
generally agreed that, in determining the nature of a combined performance
obligation, an entity should consider the reasons why it decided that the goods
or services are not distinct from each other. However, in arrangements of the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         590
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




nature in question, there may be some competing evidence to consider.
For example:
— A software license and customization services are generally only combined
  when the customization is ‘significant’. Insignificant customization would
  neither meet the ‘significant customization or modification’ factor in
  paragraph 606-10-25-21, nor lead to a conclusion that the software entity is
  providing a ‘significant integration service’ using the software license and
  the customization services as inputs. Therefore, the customization efforts in
  a combined performance obligation would typically be viewed as significant.
— In general, the basis for a conclusion that a software license and
  unspecified item rights are not distinct from each other in these cases is
  the integral nature of the updates, upgrades, enhancements or additional
  software products to the continued utility of the software license.
Significant judgment will be required to select an appropriate measure of
progress in a scenario of this nature. However, whatever measure of progress
is chosen, we believe it would not be in accordance with the guidance to either:
— default – i.e. without appropriate consideration – to a time-based measure
  of progress for the combined performance obligation; or
— adopt a measure of progress that would recognize all of the revenue
  attributable to the combined performance obligation before the customer’s
  right to unspecified items expires.
After appropriate consideration, a time-based measure of progress,
commencing at the point in time the customer can begin to use and benefit
from the software licensed under the arrangement may be appropriate. This
may be before or only after the software customization is complete, depending
on the facts and circumstances. For example, commencement before
completion of the customization may be appropriate if the customer obtains
control of the software license before the entity undertakes the customization
services (see Question F200) and is provided unspecified updates, upgrades
and enhancements released during the customization period.
It would generally not be appropriate to follow a ‘zero gross-margin’ approach –
i.e. recognize revenue to the extent of costs incurred (e.g. in customizing the
software) until the customization is complete and then recognize the remainder
of the transaction price allocated to the performance obligation ratably (i.e. on a
time basis) over the remaining period the customer has rights to unspecified
items. A ‘zero gross-margin’ approach was generally an acceptable method for
recognizing revenue under legacy US GAAP when the arrangement included
services essential to the software (e.g. services to significantly modify or
customize the software) and PCS or hosting services for which the software
entity did not have vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (VSOE).
However, we do not believe it would be appropriate under Topic 606 because
the cost-to-cost (at zero margin) method employed before the customization
services’ completion and the time-based method employed subsequently
would constitute the use of multiple measures of progress for a single
performance obligation, which is prohibited under Topic 606 (paragraph 606-10-
25-32).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         591
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Question H230 discusses the effect of using a measure of progress on the
accounting for fulfillment costs when that results in incurring those costs before
recognizing any revenue on the performance obligation.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

The requirement to use a single measure of progress and its effect on an
entity’s ability to follow a ‘zero gross margin’ approach for arrangements of the
nature in this question will represent a change for entities that previously used
the zero gross margin approach in those cases.
Entities were not required to use the zero gross margin approach. It was
generally acceptable for entities to apply the completed contract method until
the customization services were complete (i.e. to defer all of the revenue and
the costs) and then recognize the revenues and related costs ratably over the
PCS or hosting period. Meanwhile, use of the completed contract method was
required if it was not reasonably assured that no loss would be incurred under
the arrangement. For entities following the completed contract method for
these arrangements, the accounting under Topic 606 will also likely result in a
change unless the entity concludes that a time-based measure of progress,
commencing only after completion of the customization services, is appropriate.
In addition to the above discussion, there will be substantial differences in
accounting that will result from the vastly different separation guidance – i.e.
the population of arrangements that include one or more software licenses,
customization services, and rights to unspecified items that will be accounted
for as a single performance obligation will likely be much smaller.



                   Question F275
                   Over what time period should an entity recognize
                   revenue when the performance obligation has an
                   indefinite term?
Background: An entity may enter into a contract to provide an over-time
performance obligation in perpetuity. For example, a gaming company may
provide access to its web-based content for an indefinite term.
Interpretive response: Topic 606 does not explicitly address how an entity
should determine the period of revenue recognition for an indefinite term.
However, the underlying principle is that an entity recognizes revenue by
measuring progress toward complete satisfaction in a manner that depicts its
performance. This typically involves estimating the entity’s progress toward
completion. Therefore, we believe it is appropriate to estimate the period in
which the entity expects to perform. [606-10-25-31]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         592
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




When the contract includes an indefinite term, we believe the entity should
consider all relevant factors to determine the appropriate period including, but
not limited to the:
— customer life – e.g. average period of customer usage; and
— expected life of underlying technology, product or IP.
The period the entity estimates depends on the nature of the service, and facts
and circumstances about the entity and the customer. The period should best
depict the entity’s performance in fulfilling its obligation to that customer.
— In some cases, it will be appropriate to recognize revenue over a period that
  is less than the life of the underlying technology, product or IP when an
  entity has reliable data to support that the entity is transferring control of
  the service over the customer life.
— In other cases, an entity may expect to provide services to the customer
  throughout the life of the underlying technology, product or IP, or it may not
  have reliable data to support a shorter customer life.



                  Question F280
                  When is it appropriate to use the ‘as-invoiced’
                  practical expedient for arrangements that contain a
                  change in the unit price under a time and materials
                  (T&M) or transaction-based contract?
Interpretive response: At the July 2015 TRG meeting, TRG members agreed
that an entity is not precluded from applying the ‘as-invoiced’ practical
expedient in situations in which the price per unit changes during the duration
of the contract. The FASB and IASB staff and TRG members noted that
application of the practical expedient in those situations involves an analysis of
the facts and circumstances of the arrangement. The objective of the analysis is
to determine whether the amount invoiced for goods or services reasonably
represents the value to the customer of the entity’s performance completed to
date. For example, a contract to purchase electricity at prices that change each
year based on the observable forward market price of electricity would qualify
for the practical expedient if the rates per unit reflect the value of the provision
of those units to the customer.
Another example discussed by the TRG was an IT outsourcing arrangement
where the hourly rate charged for the activities underlying the IT service
obligation reflects the increased complexity of the underlying activities that will
be performed earlier in the contract period versus later in the contract period,
requiring more experienced (i.e. more costly) personnel to perform the activities
at the outset. The example also appears to consider the effect of a ‘learning
curve’ – i.e. in most circumstances, personnel will, over time, become more
efficient at performing the same tasks.
Consequently, there are instances where a change in the per unit pricing will
not preclude use of the practical expedient; however, considering the TRG
discussion and FASB/IASB staff memos from the July 2015 TRG meeting, the
reasons for the change in the per unit pricing must be substantive (e.g. for a



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         593
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




valid business reason, such as declining costs or changes in the relevant index)
and the amount of the change must approximate the change in value to the
customer. The SEC observer to the TRG stated that this latter conclusion must
be supported (e.g. supported by the change in a forward pricing curve in the
case of electricity, a change in the Consumer Price Index or a change in labor
data that is relevant to the entity’s costs of providing the goods or services).



                  Example F280.1
                  Changes linked to an observable index or rate
Scenario 1: Changes in unit rates linked to an observable index
SaaS Provider enters into a contract with Customer to provide Customer with
access to its hosted transaction processing application for three years on a
SaaS basis – i.e. Customer does not have the right to take possession of the
hosted software. Fees for the SaaS are transaction-based, starting at $0.90 per
transaction for the first year and then adjusting each year by an amount equal to
the change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Even though the fees per transaction Customer will pay will change in Years 2
and 3 of the arrangement, SaaS Provider concludes that it can still apply the as-
invoiced practical expedient. This is on the basis that, even though Customer
will pay a higher per-transaction fee for the SaaS in Year 2 than in Year 1 and in
Year 3 than in Year 2, the change in fee reflects the change in the value of the
services to Customer (resulting from inflation of the related currency), rather
than a change in the price Customer is paying for the same service with the
same value to Customer. As a result, SaaS Provider concludes that the fees it
will receive during each period of the arrangement appropriately reflect the
value to the customer of the entity’s performance of providing access to its
hosted application in each period of the arrangement.
Note that we do not believe the conclusion in this example would be affected
by the amount of the expected changes in CPI during the contract period – i.e.
the conclusion would not be affected by whether expected CPI changes were
nominal or significant. Rather, the key consideration in this example is that the
fees each period are reflective of the value to the customer of the service
provided in that period even though the actual monetary amounts paid are not
the same. To the extent that costs which are captured in an index such as CPI
are reflective of the cost of providing the service, how the changes in price
relate to CPI may inform the analysis as to whether the fees are commensurate
with the value to the customer each period of the arrangement.
Scenario 2: Changes in unit rates linked to greater of an observable index
or fixed change
Assume the same facts as Scenario 1 except that SaaS Provider charges $0.90
per transaction for the first year and then adjusts each subsequent year by an
amount equal to the greater of the change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) or
7%. CPI currently is expected to increase at 2% for the upcoming year and
SaaS Provider’s costs are not expected to increase more than CPI.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         594
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




In this fact pattern, the price is expected to increase 7% each year which is not
consistent with inflation or SaaS Provider’s historical pricing or cost trends. As
such, SaaS Provider concludes that it cannot use the as-invoiced practical
expedient because the change is not supported by valid business reasons, such
as being commensurate with the increase in costs of providing the service or
changes in CPI.



                  Example F280.2
                  Different per unit rates within a performance
                  obligation
ABC Corp. licenses software to Customer and also agrees to provide
implementation services (which are determined to be a single performance
obligation that is distinct from the software license – see Questions C240 –
C260). There is a fixed fee of $1,000,000 in the contract, which is listed as a
‘license fee’. There is no stated fee total for the implementation services; fees
for the services will be billed to the customer on a time and materials (T&M)
basis using a rate card that differentiates hourly rates by the ABC employee’s
role (e.g. $325 per hour for a senior developer and $160 per hour for an
associate engineer). The rates on the rate card reflect observable hourly
rates ABC charges customers for its professional services on a stand-alone
basis. ABC keeps tight control over the hourly rates it charges for its
professional services.
The rate card means that, despite the fact that the implementation services
are a single performance obligation, ABC will bill Customer a different hourly
rate depending on which ABC employee is performing the task generating
the billing.
ABC concludes that it is appropriate to allocate the hourly T&M billings entirely
to the implementation services performance obligation and the fixed fee of
$1,000,000 entirely to the software license. This is because:
— the variable payments for the implementation services relate specifically to
  those services;
— the hourly rates are at ABC’s observable stand-alone selling price for those
  services, such that the transaction price for the implementation services
  resulting from the T&M billings will meet the transaction price allocation
  objective; and
— the stand-alone selling price for the software license is highly variable such
  that allocating the entire fixed fee to the software license, based on a
  residual approach to estimating the stand-alone selling price for the license,
  is also reasonable.
ABC will recognize the revenue attributable to the software license when
Customer obtains control of that license (see Questions F10 – F90).
With respect to the implementation services, assuming the rate card
differences reflect (1) substantive differences between the tasks the respective
ABC employees will perform – e.g. a senior developer will be performing tasks
commensurate with his/her skill-set that an associate engineer cannot perform,



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         595
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




and not performing tasks an associate engineer can perform – and (2) ABC’s
costs of those services (e.g. the hourly rate difference is reasonable in relation
to ABC’s employee costs), use of the practical expedient to recognize revenue
for the implementation services performance obligation may be appropriate.



                  Question F290
                  Do upfront fees paid by the customer preclude use
                  of the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient?
Interpretive response: In general, fees paid upfront that are not directly linked
to the value of goods or services transferred to date preclude the use of the
practical expedient for a specific performance obligation. This is because the
Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC167) states that the ‘as-invoiced’
practical expedient “is appropriate if the amount of consideration that the entity
has a right to invoice corresponds directly with the value to the customer of
each incremental good or service that the entity transfers to the customer”.
Put another way, the practical expedient was designed to apply when the
transaction price varies in direct proportion to a variable quantity of goods or
services transferred to the customer – i.e. where the transaction price = a fixed
per unit price (see Question F280) × a variable quantity of units (TP = P × Q).
Therefore, in general, fees paid upfront that are not directly linked to the value
of goods or services provided to date would preclude use of the practical
expedient for a given performance obligation.
However, at the July 2015 TRG meeting, it was generally agreed that an upfront
or back-end fee, not linked to units transferred, would not, in isolation, preclude
use of the practical expedient in all circumstances.
While it is clear why an upfront fee, unrelated to the P × Q aspect of the
arrangement, that reflects the value of other goods or services provided to the
customer would not preclude use of the practical expedient, we believe the
TRG discussion also suggested that an insignificant upfront fee (in relation to
the expected P × Q consideration) should not preclude use of the practical
expedient. We believe the latter conclusion is premised, principally, on a
materiality basis that an insignificant upfront fee would not:
— necessarily mean that the amounts later invoiced do not reflect the value to
  the customer of the goods or services being transferred; or
— substantively affect the overall measure of progress, based on units
  transferred to the customer, toward satisfaction of the performance
  obligation.
In contrast, a more-than-insignificant upfront fee, that is not linked to the
transfer of goods or services to the customer, would preclude use of the ‘as
invoiced’ expedient. This is because the upfront fee in that case would typically
suggest that amounts to which the entity has a right to invoice in later periods
do not reflect the value to the customer of the goods or services transferred
during the applicable invoice period (i.e. the value of those goods or services
includes a portion of the upfront fee). Recognition of the upfront fee using one
measure of progress (e.g. a time-based measure) and applying the ‘as invoiced’




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         596
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




expedient to variable fees would constitute using multiple measures of
progress for a single performance obligation, which is prohibited under
Topic 606. This would be the case even if the measure of progress applied to
the upfront fee is an output-based measure such as one based on units
produced – an output-based measure selected in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-55-17 is not the same measure of progress as the ‘as-
invoiced’ practical expedient.
Judgment will be required to determine whether an upfront fee is insignificant
such that it does not preclude use of the practical expedient.



                  Example F290.1
                  Upfront fees and application of the practical
                  expedient
SaaS Provider enters into a contract with Customer to provide Customer with
access to its hosted transaction processing application for three years on a
SaaS basis – i.e. Customer does not have the right to take possession of the
hosted software. Transaction-based fees apply; the Customer will pay SaaS
Provider $0.90 per transaction throughout the contract period, billed quarterly in
arrears. There are no other promised goods or services in the contract.
Scenario 1
In addition to the transaction-based fees, Customer is required to pay a
nonrefundable upfront fee of $12,000. SaaS Provider, based on relevant,
predictive experience, expects transaction-based fees from the arrangement of
approximately $480,000.
The $12,000 nonrefundable upfront fee does not relate to a promised good or
service because there are no promised goods or services other than the SaaS in
the contract. However, the upfront fee may not preclude SaaS Provider from
using the practical expedient to recognize revenue in this case on a materiality
basis. This is because, in this scenario, the insignificance of the upfront fee
does not change that the transaction-based fees earned each period reflect the
value to the customer of its ability to process those transactions during that
period. In addition, assuming Customer incurs between $35,000 and $50,000 in
transaction-based fees each quarter, recognition of the upfront fee would not
have a significant effect on either (1) the revenue recognized or (2) the overall
pattern of revenue recognition (suggesting use of multiple measures of
progress for the single performance obligation).
— On a straight-line basis, recognition of the upfront fee would only affect
  quarterly revenue recognized by $1,000
— Recognition on an output (i.e. units produced) basis would affect quarterly
  revenue by $875 to $1,200, recognizing less in quarters with less
  transaction volume (e.g. $875 recognized in a month with $35,000 in
  transaction-based revenue) and more in quarters with higher transaction
  volume (e.g. $1,200 in a month with $50,000 in transaction-based revenue).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         597
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Scenario 2
In addition to the transaction-based fees, Customer is required to pay a
nonrefundable upfront fee of $48,000. SaaS Provider, based on relevant,
predictive experience, expects transaction-based fees from the arrangement of
approximately $480,000.
In this scenario, the $48,000 upfront fee is significant. Because the upfront fee
does not reflect a commensurate payment for goods or services transferred (or
partially transferred) to the customer at the time it is paid, it suggests the fees
to which SaaS Provider will have a right to invoice each period – i.e. for
transactions processed that period – will not reasonably reflect the value of the
entity’s performance for that period. In addition, the significant upfront fee
substantively changes the character of the revenue recognition for this
arrangement from one based on the TP = P × Q formula upon which the
practical expedient is based. Therefore, the practical expedient should not be
applied to this arrangement.
Even though the practical expedient does not apply, SaaS Provider may be able
to recognize the revenue attributable to the P × Q formula (i.e. the $480,000 in
expected transaction-based fees) in a manner that is generally consistent with
the recognition that would result from applying the practical expedient. That is,
SaaS Provider may be able to recognize the transaction-based fees in the period
in which the transactions are processed on the SaaS platform as a result of the
variable consideration allocation guidance that applies, in many cases, to series
of distinct goods or services (see paragraphs 606-10-32-39 – 32-40). See
Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance
obligations in the contract.
Scenario 3
In addition to the transaction-based fees, Customer is required to pay quarterly
fixed fees, in arrears, of $4,000 (for a total of $48,000). SaaS Provider, based on
relevant, predictive experience, expects transaction-based fees from the
arrangement of approximately $480,000.
Judgment will be required to determine whether the practical expedient can be
applied in this scenario given the ambiguity of the TRG discussion.
On one hand, the fixed fee, in effect, changes the per unit transaction-based
fee each period. For example, if Customer processes 40,000 transactions in the
first quarter, the net per-transaction fee is $1.00 per transaction (([40,000
transactions × $0.90 = $36,000] + $4,000 = $40,000) ÷ 40,000 transactions),
while if Customer processes 50,000 transactions, the net per-transaction fee is
$0.98 (([50,000 transactions × $0.90 = $45,000] + $4,000 = $49,000) ÷ 50,000
transactions). Unless the change from period to period in the net per-transaction
fee reflects changing value to the customer (see Question F280), one might
conclude that use of the practical expedient is not permitted in this situation.
Alternatively, SaaS Provider might still conclude that the practical expedient can
be applied if there is a narrow range of per-transaction prices that could
reasonably reflect an appropriate ‘value to the customer’ and that range
includes those reasonably expected to arise – e.g. if per transaction fees of
anywhere within a range of $0.96 – $1.01 would represent value to the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         598
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




customer and SaaS Provider reasonably expects to be within that range
throughout the contract.



                  Question F300
                  Does a contractual minimum preclude the use of
                  the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient?
Interpretive response: In general, a contractual minimum quantity that the
entity validly expects the customer to easily surpass would not be considered a
substantive minimum and would not preclude the use of the ‘as-invoiced’
practical expedient.
In contrast, if the contractual minimum is such that there is a reasonable
possibility that the customer will not exceed that minimum, the entity should
not apply the practical expedient. Rather the entity should apply the general
guidance on determining the transaction price (including the general constraint
on variable consideration) – see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction
price – and select an appropriate measure of progress for that performance
obligation. For example, consider a SaaS arrangement with transaction-based
pricing for which there is a reasonable possibility that the customer will not
exceed the minimum quantity of transactions (and for which the entity cannot
apply the series/variable consideration allocation guidance – see Chapter E –
Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the
contract). In that scenario, the SaaS provider may conclude that a time-based
measure of progress applied to the sum of the minimum transaction-based fees
and a constrained estimate of transaction-based fees above that minimum (if
any) is appropriate.
At the November 2016 TRG meeting, the TRG discussed one alternative
(amongst two others), proposed to be applied to minimum guaranteed royalties
for a license of symbolic IP (i.e. a right to access license). Under that alternative,
the entity would recognize the minimum guarantee (fixed consideration) using
an appropriate measure of progress and recognize royalties above the
guaranteed amount only when cumulative royalties exceed the minimum
guarantee. Some have questioned whether this approach would be acceptable
for a SaaS arrangement with transaction- or usage-based fees subject to a
guaranteed minimum – e.g. a situation where the customer will pay $0.90 per
transaction subject to a guaranteed amount of $180,000 if the customer’s
transaction volume does not exceed 200,000 transactions. We do not believe
the TRG alternative applicable to licenses of symbolic IP can be extrapolated to
SaaS arrangements. This is because the TRG right to access license alternative
is premised on application of the royalties constraint to the sales- or usage-
based royalty (see paragraphs 22-24 of TRG Agenda Paper No. 58), which only
applies to licenses of IP, rather than the general constraint on variable
consideration, which applies to transaction-based fees in a SaaS arrangement.
Application of the general constraint results in the accounting described in the
preceding paragraph.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         599
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Example F300.1
                  Non-substantive minimum
SaaS Provider enters into a contract with Customer to provide Customer with
access to its hosted transaction processing application for three years on a
SaaS basis – i.e. Customer does not have the right to take possession of the
hosted software. Fees for the SaaS are transaction-based at $0.90 per
transaction throughout the three-year term, subject to an annual minimum of
$90,000 ($0.90 × 100,000 transactions).
SaaS Provider has a number of contracts similar to the one with Customer and
relevant experience suggests, barring some unforeseen event, that Customer
will process more than 250,000 transactions the first year (a ‘ramp up’ period)
and more than 350,000 in the each of the second and third years.
Because SaaS Provider expects Customer will far exceed the annual minimum
each year of the contract, SaaS Provider concludes that the annual minimum,
which SaaS Provider includes in its contracts to ensure a minimum recovery of
its fixed costs if all of its customers paid only their contractual minimums
annually, is not a substantive clause of the contract. Therefore, SaaS Provider
concludes that the contractual minimum does not preclude the use of the ‘as-
invoiced’ practical expedient for this contract.



                  Example F300.2
                  Substantive minimum, assume variable
                  consideration allocation guidance does not apply
SaaS Provider enters into a contract with Customer to provide Customer with
access to its hosted transaction processing application for three years on a
SaaS basis – i.e. Customer does not have the right to take possession of the
hosted software. Fees for the SaaS are transaction-based at $1.00 per
transaction throughout the three-year term, subject to a cumulative minimum of
$270,000 ($1.00 × 90,000 transactions × 3 years).
SaaS Provider has a number of contracts similar to the one with Customer and
that relevant experience suggests that Customer will process between 88,000
and 98,000 transactions each year. Using an expected value method, SaaS
Provider estimates a total transaction volume of 280,000. SaaS Provider has
determined that its expected value estimate of the transaction-based variable
consideration does not need to be constrained because (1) its evidence is based
on substantial history with similar arrangements and (2) there is negligible risk
of any cumulative revenue reversal being ‘significant’ given the amount of the
contractual minimum and the fact that the performance obligation is satisfied
over time. That is, SaaS Provider concludes that its estimate of the transaction-
based fees is unlikely to change significantly and any effect of a change in
estimate (e.g. $10,000 change in estimated transaction-based fees) will only
apply to the extent of progress to date in satisfying the performance obligation.
SaaS Provider recognizes the $280,000 transaction price ratably over the
three-year SaaS period. SaaS Provider concludes that a time-based measure of




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         600
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




progress appropriately reflects its generally equal efforts to provide access to
Customer throughout the three-year term. To the extent SaaS Provider’s
estimate of the transaction price (including consideration of the constraint)
changes, SaaS Provider will record a cumulative effect adjustment as necessary
to true up revenue recognized to date.
Alternatively, SaaS Provider may determine that an output-based measure is an
appropriate measure of progress to apply to the performance obligation – i.e.
recognizing actual transaction-based fees earned as compared to total expected
transactions that will be processed through the hosted application – because
the number of transactions processed provides a direct measurement of the
value Customer has obtained to date from SaaS Provider’s performance of
providing Customer with access to its hosted application. In concept, to the
extent SaaS Provider’s estimate of the transaction price (including consideration
of the constraint) changes – i.e. because of changes in the estimate of
transactions Customer will process using the application – SaaS Provider would
record a cumulative effect adjustment to true up revenue recognized to date.
However, mathematically, no cumulative effect adjustment would result when
using this measure of progress unless SaaS Provider’s estimate of total
transactions that will be processed falls below the contractual minimum.



                  Question F310
                  Do contractual provisions such as tiered-pricing,
                  rebates, credits and refunds preclude the use of the
                  ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient?
Interpretive response: SaaS arrangements frequently include provisions
whereby either (or both):
— a per-usage or per-transaction fee decreases based on volume
  prospectively. For example, the customer pays $0.90 per transaction for the
  first 100,000 transactions processed by the hosted application; $0.80 for
  the next 200,000 transactions; and $0.75 for all those thereafter. Tiered
  pricing of this nature may exist for an entire SaaS arrangement period or it
  may reset multiple times (e.g. each year or each month) during the
  arrangement period.
— the customer is entitled to a refund or rebate (of cash previously paid) or a
  credit that can be applied against future invoices if it passes a particular
  usage or transaction volume. Often these provisions are accompanied by
  tiered-pricing. For example, assume the same tiered pricing as in #1;
  however, when the customer passes into a lower pricing tier, it receives
  that pricing retrospectively for all prior transactions through a refund, rebate
  or a credit.
Such provisions, in effect, either or both (1) create variable consideration (e.g.
refunds, rebates or credits) or (2) create different rates per unit at different
times during the contract (e.g. tiered pricing).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         601
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Tiered pricing
The circumstances in which a change in the price per unit, such as occurs in a
tiered pricing scenario, is permitted without precluding use of the as-invoiced
practical expedient are addressed in Question F280.
Rebates, refunds, or credits
Variable consideration (whether created by expected refunds, rebates, or
credits or something else) will generally preclude use of the as-invoiced
practical expedient to recognize revenue because the amount to which the
customer has a right to invoice will not, at least until the customer achieves the
lowest pricing tier, reflect the amount to which the entity expects to be entitled.
It is prohibited from recognizing the invoiced amount as revenue because there
is an expectation of later price concessions. The expectation of later price
concessions (i.e. changes to the invoiced price) also means the invoiced
amounts do not reflect the value to the customer of the services provided.



                  Question F320
                  Does the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient permit an
                  entity to wait until it has a right to invoice the
                  customer to recognize revenue (rather than accrue
                  for revenue earned, but not yet invoiced)?
Interpretive response: No. If an entity transfers goods or services to a
customer during a reporting period, but does not have the right to invoice for
those goods under the terms of the contract, the entity would still recognize
revenue for those goods on an accrual basis. This would include situations in
which the entity has to estimate quantities of goods or services transferred.
For example, an entity enters into a contract with a customer on a time and
materials basis, but only bills the customer on a quarterly basis. In that scenario,
when applying the as-invoiced practical expedient, the entity would recognize
revenue as the time and materials are incurred rather than on a quarterly basis.



                  Question F330
                  Can the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient be applied
                  to sales- and usage-based royalties promised in
                  exchange for a software license?
Interpretive response: Typically, no. The ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient is a
practical expedient for measuring progress toward complete satisfaction of a
performance obligation satisfied over time. If a software license is a separate
performance obligation, it is satisfied at a point in time. Therefore, no measure
of progress is applied. Practically however, because the recognition of sales- or
usage-based fees promised in exchange for a distinct software license in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-65 (i.e. the royalties recognition
constraint) will be recognized when the customer’s subsequent sales or usage




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         602
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




occur, that recognition may be substantially similar to that which results from
the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient.
The ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient could, however, potentially be applied to a
combined performance obligation that includes a software license if that
performance obligation is satisfied over time. For example, if in the anti-virus
software example in Topic 606 (Example 10, Case C), the customer paid the
software entity an amount each month based on the number of viruses
detected and quarantined, the entity would be able to apply the practical
expedient, provided the other requirements for use of the expedient (e.g. with
respect to upfront fees and changing rates, if applicable) were met.



Sales- or usage-based royalties promised in
exchange for a license of IP

                 Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Sales-Based or Usage-Based Royalties
55-65 Notwithstanding the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through 32-
14, an entity should recognize revenue for a sales-based or usage-based
royalty promised in exchange for a license of intellectual property only when
(or as) the later of the following events occurs:
a. The subsequent sale or usage occurs.
b. The performance obligation to which some or all of the sales-based or
   usage-based royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially
   satisfied).
55-65A The guidance for a sales-based or usage-based royalty in
paragraph 606-10-55-65 applies when the royalty relates only to a license of
intellectual property or when a license of intellectual property is the
predominant item to which the royalty relates (for example, the license of
intellectual property may be the predominant item to which the royalty relates
when the entity has a reasonable expectation that the customer would
ascribe significantly more value to the license than to the other goods or
services to which the royalty relates).
55-65B When the guidance in paragraph 606-10-55-65A is met, revenue from
a sales-based or usage-based royalty should be recognized wholly in
accordance with the guidance in paragraph 606-10-55-65. When the guidance
in paragraph 606-10-55-65A is not met, the guidance on variable consideration
in paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through 32-14 applies to the sales-based or usage-
based royalty.
• • > Example 60—Sales-Based Royalty Promised in Exchange for a License
of Intellectual Property and Other Goods and Services
55-393 An entity, a movie distribution company, licenses Movie XYZ to a
customer. The customer, an operator of cinemas, has the right to show the
movie in its cinemas for six weeks. Additionally, the entity has agreed to



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         603
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




provide memorabilia from the filming to the customer for display at the
customer’s cinemas before the beginning of the six-week airing period and to
sponsor radio advertisements for Movie XYZ on popular radio stations in the
customer’s geographical area throughout the six-week airing period. In
exchange for providing the license and the additional promotional goods
and services, the entity will receive a portion of the operator’s ticket sales
for Movie XYZ (that is, variable consideration in the form of a sales-
based royalty).
55-394 The entity concludes that the license to show Movie XYZ is the
predominant item to which the sales-based royalty relates because the entity
has a reasonable expectation that the customer would ascribe significantly
more value to the license than to the related promotional goods or services.
The entity will recognize revenue from the sales-based royalty, the only fees
to which the entity is entitled under the contract, wholly in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-55-65. If the license, the memorabilia, and the advertising
activities were separate performance obligations, the entity would allocate
the sales-based royalties to each performance obligation.


Scope of the guidance on sales- and usage-based
royalties
The guidance included above does not apply to royalties promised in exchange
for either:
— SaaS, including contracts that state a software license is part of the
  arrangement, but that license does not meet the criteria in paragraph 985-
  20-15-5 – see paragraph 606-10-55-54(a); or
— sales of software – i.e. a sale of the IP itself, rather than a license to that IP.
  For purposes of determining whether an arrangement is for the sale or the
  license of software, an entity follows the legal form of the contract – i.e. an
  entity does not attempt to determine if the license (even if exclusive and
  perpetual) is ‘in substance’ a sale of the IP.
Chapter A – Scope addresses determining whether a contract includes a
software license that meets the criteria in paragraph 985-20-15-5.


Recognition requirements
Sales- or usage-based royalties promised in exchange for a license of IP are
recognized at the later of:
— when the subsequent sales or usage occur; and
— the satisfaction or partial satisfaction of the performance obligation to which
  some or all of the sales- or usage-based royalty has been allocated.
The sales- or usage-based ‘royalties recognition constraint’ functions as a
recognition constraint and the constraint on variable consideration in the general
model does not apply. That is, revenue attributable to a sales- or usage-based
royalty cannot be recognized before meeting one of the two ‘later of’ criteria in
the preceding paragraph. [ASU 2016-10.BC71]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         604
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Application to royalties promised in exchange for a
license to IP and other goods or services
An entity may be entitled to a sales- or usage-based royalty in exchange for a
license of IP and other goods or services in the contract, which may or may not
be distinct from the license. Licenses of IP are often bundled with other goods
or services, with the consideration taking the form of a sales- or usage-based
royalty for all goods or services in the contract. For example:
— software licenses are commonly sold with PCS and other services – e.g.
  implementation services – or hardware where there is a single
  consideration in the form of a sales- or usage-based royalty;
— franchise licenses are frequently sold with consulting or training services or
  equipment, with ongoing consideration in the form of a sales-based royalty;
  or
— biotechnology and pharmaceutical licenses are often sold with R&D
  services and/or a promise to manufacture the drug for the customer, with a
  single consideration in the form of a sales-based royalty.
Sales- or usage-based royalties are subject to the ‘royalties recognition
constraint’ when either:
— the royalty relates only to a license (or licenses) of IP; or
— a license (or licenses) is the predominant item to which the royalty relates
  (e.g. when the customer would ascribe significantly more value to the
  license(s) of IP than to the other goods or services to which the royalty
  relates).
Significant judgment may be required to determine whether a license is the
predominant item in an arrangement. Topic 606 is not explicit about whether a
license of IP is the predominant item only when it represents the major part or
substantially all of the value or utility of the bundle or whether the exception
would also apply when a license of IP is the largest single item in a bundle of
goods or services.
An entity does not split a royalty that relates to a license of IP and another good
or service into a portion that is subject to the royalties recognition constraint
and a portion that is subject to the general guidance on variable consideration
(including the constraint on variable consideration).
The figure below summarizes the requirements.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         605
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                               Recognized at the later of when:
  a) Subsequent sale or usage occurs
  b) Performance obligation to which some or all of the sales-based or usage-based royalty
  has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied)
  [Paragraph 606-10-55-65]

         Note: Royalties recognition constraint is a constraint on revenue recognized

   Royalty relates to license(s) of IP or license(s) of IP is the predominant item to which
                                      the royalty relates?

                                              [Paragraph 606-10-55-65A]
                                                             - -55- 65A]
                          Yes                                                                               No



    Sales-based or usage-based                                                      Apply variable consideration
              model                                                                 model [Paragraph 606-10-32-5
     [Paragraph 606-10-55-65]                                                              through 32-14]




                  Illustrative Example F1
                  Usage-based fees in a software licensing
                  arrangement
ABC Corp. licenses transaction-processing software to financial institutions.
ABC executes a three-year term license with Customer. The software is
functional IP and provides Customer with a right to use ABC’s software (see
Questions F10 and F20). Under the contract, ABC will receive a fixed fee of
$200,000 plus additional usage-based fees of $0.01 per transaction processed
by the software. There is no guaranteed minimum for the usage-based fees.
For ease of illustration, this contract does not include any additional promised
goods or services.
This is ABC’s first contract with Customer, but ABC has similar license
arrangements with a dozen other financial institutions similar to Customer.
ABC is also aware that financial institutions such as Customer are required by
law to process transactions of the nature ABC’s software performs on behalf of
its clients.
Despite the fact that ABC may be able to estimate a minimum amount of
transaction-based fees to which it will reasonably be entitled from transferring
the license to Customer, Topic 606 specifically prohibits recognition of
transaction/usage-based fees before the customer’s usage takes place.
This means that ABC will recognize $200,000 in revenue upon transfer control
of the software license to Customer and will recognize additional transaction-
based fees each period based on the number of transactions actually processed
using the software during that period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         606
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP, a sales- or usage-based royalty – irrespective of
whether it relates to the licensing of IP or other goods or services – is
recognized only when the amount is fixed or determinable, which is typically
when the subsequent sale or usage occurs. In addition, legacy US GAAP
specifies that substantive milestone fees may be recognized once the
milestone is achieved.
Under Topic 606, a sales- or usage-based royalty that relates (1) entirely to a
non-license element or (2) to a license and a non-license element, but the
license element is not the predominant item to which the royalty relates, will be
included in the transaction price (subject to the constraint on variable
consideration) and recognized sooner than under legacy US GAAP.



                   Question F335
                   Does the royalty exception apply for an agent if
                   revenue is based on royalties from a customer’s
                   license of IP?
Interpretive response: It can. In certain arrangements, a software vendor (the
principal) contracts with an agent to sell licenses to the software. In return for
selling its licenses, the software vendor pays the selling agent a percentage of
the sales- or usage-based royalties the software vendor earns from the end
consumer. For example, a software company may contract with a software
solutions consultant to sell software licenses to customers on behalf of the
software vendor in return for a percentage of royalties received from customers
based on software usage rates.
We believe that the selling agent could apply the sales-based royalty exception
in this scenario if, and only if, the agency service is directly related to the
licensor’s provision of the software license and the software license is the
predominant item to which the royalties relate. This is notwithstanding that the
selling agent is not the party responsible for fulfilling the promise to transfer the
software license.
Instead of applying the royalty exception, we believe the selling agent could
apply the general guidance on estimating variable consideration. This is because
paragraph 606-10-55-65 could be read to suggest that the royalty exception
should apply only when it is promised in exchange for a license, not arranging
for the provision of a license by another entity. An agent should be consistent in
its application of the guidance to similar arrangements.
If the agency services do not relate directly to the licensor’s provision of the
software license (e.g. they instead relate to the licensor or another party’s
provision of a service, including a software-related service such as hosting or
implementation services) or if the software license is not the predominant item
to which the royalties relate, the royalty exception does not apply and the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         607
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




selling agent must apply the general guidance on estimating variable
consideration (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price).



                  Question F340
                  Should a software entity account for a minimum
                  guaranteed royalty promised in exchange for a
                  software license as fixed consideration or in
                  accordance with the ‘royalties recognition
                  constraint’?
Interpretive response: If sales- or usage-based royalties promised in exchange
for a right-to-use license have a minimum guaranteed amount (that is not
subject to other forms of variability such as a price concession), that amount is
fixed consideration and should be recognized in the same manner as any other
fixed consideration – i.e. it should be recognized when the customer obtains
control of the license. This is the case regardless of the amount of the
minimum.
Any royalties earned in excess of the minimum guaranteed amount should be
accounted for as variable consideration, subject to the sales- or usage-based
royalties recognition constraint – i.e. recognized when the customer’s
subsequent sales or usage occur.



                  Example F340.1
                  Software license with a guaranteed minimum
ABC Corp. enters into a five-year arrangement to license software to Customer.
The software license provides the customer with a right to use ABC’s software
(see Questions F10 and F20). The consideration for the license is a sales-based
royalty of 5% of the customer’s gross sales of products that include ABC’s
software with a minimum guaranteed amount of $5 million.
At the point in time control of the software license is transferred to Customer
(see Questions F10 – F90), the $5 million guaranteed royalty amount is
recognized as revenue. Any royalties in excess of the $5 million minimum
guaranteed amount are recognized when Customer’s subsequent sales occur.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         608
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F350
                  Is it acceptable under Topic 606 to recognize
                  revenue resulting from a sales- or usage-based
                  royalty in a period subsequent to the period in
                  which the customer’s subsequent sales or usage
                  occur if the entity does not receive reporting on
                  those sales or usage timely (i.e. on a ‘lag’ basis)?
Interpretive response: No. If the consideration to which the entity is entitled
from a sales- or usage-based royalty is not known in time for the entity’s
financial reporting (e.g. the entity will not receive a royalty report before it must
file its Form 10-Q or Form 10-K), the entity must estimate the royalties to which
it is entitled using the model for estimating variable consideration in
paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through 32-9.
This position was articulated in remarks to the Annual SEC and Financial
Reporting Institute Conference on June 9, 2016. Wesley R. Bricker, Deputy
Chief Accountant in the Office of the Chief Accountant of the SEC, stated that,
“The standard setters did not provide a lagged reporting exception with the
new standard. Accordingly, I believe companies should apply the sales- and
usage-based royalty guidance as specified in the new standard. The reporting,
which may require estimation of royalty usage, should be supported by
appropriate internal accounting controls.”
We understand there are two views on whether entities should apply the
variable consideration constraint when making this estimate based on the basis
for conclusions to ASU 2016-10 (BC71). We believe entities should apply a
consistent methodology to estimating these amounts.
— Apply the constraint. Under this view, entities apply the constraint
  because once the sale or usage has occurred (1) the royalty recognition
  constraint no longer applies and (2) the entity needs to estimate the
  transaction price because the ultimate amount of consideration is unknown.
— Do not apply the constraint. Under this view, entities do not consider the
  constraint because only one constraint model is applied to variable
  consideration. In the case of sales- or usage-based royalties related to IP,
  the royalty recognition constraint applies and not the general variable
  consideration constraint.



                  Example F350.1
                  Royalties report received after financial statements
                  are issued
ABC Corp. enters into a five-year arrangement to license software to Customer.
The software license provides the customer with a right to use ABC’s software
(see Questions F10 and F20). The consideration for the license is a sales-based
royalty of 5% of Customer’s gross sales to end customers of products that
include ABC’s software.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         609
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Customer uses an extensive distributor network such that it must receive
reports on sales of its products before it can report royalties owed to ABC. This
process takes time such that Customer provides royalties reporting to ABC
generally only after ABC issues its quarterly financial reports.
ABC estimates sales for the quarter using a most-likely-amount or expected-
value approach (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price) and
the constraint on variable consideration. In making its estimate, ABC considers
royalties earned in prior periods, royalties earned under similar arrangements
and other knowledge about demand for Customer’s products from consumers
during the period in question.
Regardless of the quality and availability of information, ABC estimates royalties
earned subject to the variable consideration constraint because it follows the
first view described in Question F350.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Entities applying legacy US GAAP generally followed one of three approaches in
practice; each approach was considered appropriate depending on the entity's
particular facts and circumstances.
Approach 1: Recognize revenue in the period the royalty was earned
based on reports received or other objective information available through
the date of issuance of the financial statements.
Under this approach, the receipt of a royalty report or other objective
information was viewed as a ‘Type I’ subsequent event that provided
information about revenues earned during the prior fiscal quarter. Absent a
royalty report, an entity may have used other objective evidence to quantify the
royalty revenue earned. For example, an entity may have access to a system
that provides visibility into units shipped by the manufacturer. It was generally
not considered appropriate for an entity to estimate royalty revenues based
solely on internal estimates such as historical sales trends. Under Approach 1, if
the royalty report or other objective information was not available before the
issuance of an entity's financial statements, revenues would not be recognized
until a subsequent period.
Approach 2: Recognize revenue in the period the royalty report is
received.
Under Approach 2, royalty revenue was recognized in the period in which the
report was received. This method was appealing in situations in which royalty
reports are received in an unpredictable manner at various dates that may be
well after shipment of the related goods. In contrast to Approach 1, this
approach suggested that receipt of a royalty report after period-end was more
of a Type II subsequent event (i.e. the royalty amount only became fixed or
determinable, and therefore recognizable, at the date of receipt of information
by the entity).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         610
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Approach 3: Recognize revenue on a lag basis such that revenue earned in
one period is recognized in the following period.
Under this approach, royalty revenue related to the prior period was recognized
in the current period under a lag policy. This method resulted in all revenue
related to a particular period being recognized in the subsequent period. This lag
approach was similar to the lag approach to consolidating a subsidiary that is
allowed under US GAAP (Subtopic 810-10).
None of the approaches outlined above that were applied under legacy
US GAAP would be permissible under Topic 606. While it is clear that a ‘lag’
policy (Approach 3) or a policy that explicitly requires proof of the sales to end
customers before recognition (Approach 2) are not permissible under Topic 606,
even Approach 1 is different from Topic 606’s requirements because, under
Topic 606, even in the absence of objective information, the entity must
estimate the royalties to which it is entitled using the best information it has
available (i.e. regardless of whether that information is objective).



                  Question F360
                  Are payments with fixed monetary amounts, such
                  as milestone payments, determined by reference to
                  sales- or usage-based thresholds, a sales- or usage-
                  based royalty?
Interpretive response: In general, if a fixed payment is determined solely by
reference to a sales- or usage-based threshold (e.g. a fixed amount is payable to
the entity once a cumulative sales or usage threshold is reached), it would
constitute a sales- or usage-based royalty.
In contrast, if a fixed payment is determined (solely or partially) based on
metrics or conditions that are not sales- or usage-based (and that are
substantive), that payment would not be considered a sales- or usage-based
royalty for purposes of determining whether the royalties recognition
constraint applies.



                  Example F360.1
                  Milestone payments linked to sales- or usage-based
                  amounts
ABC Corp. enters into a contract to license software to Customer. There are no
other promised goods or services in the contract. The contract contains
payment terms that include a milestone payment that is payable to ABC once
Customer has reached a specified level of sales (e.g. a $10 million milestone
payment is due after sales of $100 million have been reached).
The milestone payment is a sales-based royalty because the payment depends
entirely on subsequent sales of ABC’s software by Customer. Therefore,
because the sales-based royalty relates solely to a license of IP (i.e. the
software license granted to Customer), ABC applies the royalties recognition



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                           Revenue for software and SaaS                                        611
     F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




constraint in accounting for that royalty. ABC will recognize the milestone
payment only once the underlying sales threshold has been met.



                  Example F360.2
                  Milestone payments linked to sales- or usage-based
                  amounts and other items
Assume the same facts as in Example F360.1, except that the $10 million
milestone payment is payable only after both (1) Customer has reached sales of
$100 million of Product X that includes ABC’s software and (2) ABC has
successfully modified its software for use in Customer’s new technology
product (Product Z).
In this example, even though the milestone payment depends partially on
Customer’s subsequent sales of ABC’s software (sales of ABC’s software
included in Product X), the milestone payment is not a sales-based royalty
because the payment also depends on factors other than subsequent sales of
ABC’s software by Customer (successful modification of ABC’s software for an
additional use).
Consequently, the milestone payment is subject to the general guidance on
variable consideration (including the constraint on variable consideration), which
means any amount of such payment that is included in the transaction price at
the point in time the software license is transferred to Customer will be
recognized as revenue at that time.



                  Question F370
                  If a sales- or usage-based royalty relates to more
                  than one license and other goods and services, does
                  the royalties recognition constraint apply if no
                  single license is predominant?
Interpretive response: It depends. The Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2016-10
(BC75) states that if, together, two or more of the licenses to which the royalty
relates are predominant – i.e. the royalty relates predominantly to those multiple
licenses when considered in aggregate – the royalties recognition constraint
applies to that royalty.




                  Excerpt from ASU 2016-10

BC75. To enhance understandability and promote consistency in application,
the Board decided to clarify that:
a.     An entity should not account for a single royalty under two constraint
       models. That is, the entity should not split a single royalty between a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         612
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




   portion to which the royalties recognition constraint would apply and a
   portion to which the general constraint on variable consideration (in
   paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through 32-13) would apply. However, this
   amendment does not affect the requirement to allocate fees due from a
   sales-based or usage-based royalty to the performance obligations (or
   distinct goods or services) in the contract to which the royalty relates,
   regardless of the constraint model the entity is required to apply (see
   Example 35, Case B and Example 60 in Topic 606, which demonstrate that
   application of the royalties recognition constraint does not change the
   requirement to allocate the transaction price to the performance
   obligations in the contract).
b. A sales-based or usage-based royalty is promised in exchange for a license
   and, therefore, the royalties recognition constraint applies whenever a
   license is the sole or predominant item to which the royalty relates. This
   would include situations in which no single license is the predominant item
   to which the royalty relates but the royalty predominantly relates to two or
   more licenses promised in the contract.



                  Question F380
                  Is a promise to provide future updates, upgrades
                  and enhancements a license of IP for purposes of
                  determining the applicability of the royalties
                  recognition constraint?
Interpretive response: Whether specified or unspecified, a promise to provide
updates, upgrades and enhancements (as well as rights to use specified or
unspecified additional software products) is fundamentally a promise to provide
the customer with a right to use updated, upgraded or enhanced IP. Therefore,
when considering whether a sales- or usage-based royalty relates
predominantly to one or more (see Question F370) licenses of IP, we believe
rights to specified or unspecified updates, upgrades or enhancements (as well
as rights to use specified or unspecified additional software products) should be
considered licenses of IP.



                   Question F385
                   Can the royalty exception apply when a software
                   license is not distinct from other goods or services?
Interpretive response: Yes, but only if the license is considered the
predominant item to which the royalty relates. As stated in the basis for
conclusions to ASU 2016-10 (BC77), the FASB decided not to restrict the
royalty exception to a license that is a separate performance obligation because
of the usefulness of the information from applying the exception.
Generally, when a license is not distinct from other goods or services, the
royalty exception applies when the nature of the promise is to ultimately
transfer IP. For example, if software and customization services are combined,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         613
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




the nature of the promise may be that of modified IP and subsequent royalties
would relate to sales or usage of the modified IP.
In contrast, when the nature of a combined promise is a supply of a tangible
product with embedded IP, any subsequent royalties would generally not be
predominantly related to the IP.



                  Question F390
                  Does a declining royalty rate that applies
                  prospectively create a material right for the
                  customer with respect to future sales or usage of a
                  software license subject to the royalties recognition
                  constraint?
Interpretive response: No. Some software licensing arrangements provide
tiered pricing whereby a customer will pay a lower royalty rate later in the
contract. For example, an arrangement may require the customer to pay $0.10
per usage during the first year of the contract or until a certain volume of usage
has occurred and then $0.08 per usage thereafter. Some have questioned
whether the higher initial rate creates a material right for the customer with
respect to later usage of the software.
This type of pricing scheme does not provide the customer with a material right
because, as outlined in Question C380, each subsequent sale or usage of the
licensed software is not an ‘optional purchase’. The nature of the entity’s promise
in granting a software license is to provide the customer with the right to use the
entity’s software. Once the customer controls its right to use the software (i.e.
controls the license), the customer’s subsequent use of that right does not
involve the customer undertaking a decision to make an additional purchase from
the entity, and therefore each subsequent sale or usage is not an optional
purchase for which the customer can have a material right.
Therefore, in the example outlined, the entity would recognize the contractually
owed royalty each time a subsequent usage occurs – i.e. the entity would
recognize $0.10 in revenue per usage for as long as that is the enforceable
amount owed per usage and would recognize $0.08 in revenue per usage after
the customer reaches the defined threshold and $0.08 becomes the amount to
which the entity is entitled for each usage.



                  Example F390.1
                  Declining royalties – Prospective basis
ABC Corp. enters into a five-year arrangement to license software to
Customer. The software license provides the customer with a right to use
ABC’s software (see Questions F10 and F20). The consideration for the
license is a sales-based royalty of Customer’s gross sales to end customers of
products that include ABC’s software, structured as follows: Year 1: 10%,




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         614
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Year 2: 8%, Year 3: 6%, Year 4: 4%, Year 5: 2%. ABC is not required to
refund or adjust the price for any portion of a royalty once it is earned.
ABC does not assume a weighted average royalty rate based on the expected
sales and also does not consider whether the lower royalty rate in later years of the
contract provides the customer with a material right – i.e. because each additional
product sold using ABC’s software is not an ‘optional purchase’ by Customer.
ABC recognizes revenue as the subsequent sales of products including ABC’s
software occur based on the royalty rate applied to that sale in the contract.



                  Question F400
                  Does a declining royalty rate that applies
                  retrospectively preclude recognition of royalties
                  when the customer’s subsequent sales or usage
                  occur?
Background: In some tiered-pricing structures, the customer will be granted a
refund or credit related to royalties previously paid once the customer reaches a
lower pricing tier. For example, an arrangement may require the customer to
pay $0.10 per usage during the first year of the contract or until a certain
volume of usage has occurred and then $0.08 per usage thereafter. In addition,
the contract may require the entity to provide the customer with a rebate for
the extra $0.02 it has paid per usage while it was still within the higher pricing
tier.
Interpretive response: In such cases, the entity will need to estimate the
ultimate royalty rate that will apply to each subsequent sale or usage. The
potential rebate is variable consideration (i.e. consideration payable to a
customer) and, therefore, we believe the entity would be required to recognize
only that portion of the per-usage fee to which it expects to be entitled. This
means that, in the example above, if the entity expects to have to provide a
rebate in the amount of $0.02 per usage for each usage it initially bills $0.10,
the entity should not recognize $0.10 per usage. The entity should instead
recognize only the amount of that $0.10 to which it ultimately expects to be
entitled, which includes consideration of the general constraint on variable
consideration with respect to that variability in the per-usage rate (price).



                  Example F400.1
                  Declining royalties – Retrospective basis
ABC Corp. enters into a five-year arrangement to license software to Customer.
The software license provides the customer with a right to use ABC’s software
(see Questions F10 and F20). The consideration for the license is a sales-based
royalty of Customer’s gross sales to end customers of products that include
ABC’s software, structured as follows: First 10,000 product sales: 10%; product
sales 10,001 – 20,000: 9%; product sales 20,001 – 30,000: 8%; 30,001 –
40,000: 7%; 40,001+: 6%. When Customer crosses into a new pricing tier, it




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         615
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




receives a refund of the prior royalties it paid per unit (for all units) in excess of
the rate applicable in the new pricing tier.
ABC estimates the number of units it expects Customer to sell that include its
software. Using an expected value method (see paragraph 606-10-32-8), ABC
estimates that Customer will sell 29,000 units. ABC further concludes that it is
probable Customer will not sell any more than 33,000 units. If Customer were
to sell 29,000 units it would be entitled to 8% of Customer’s gross sales price
for all of those 29,000 units. However, if Customer sells 33,000 units, Customer
would be entitled to 7% of Customer’s gross sales price for those 33,000 units.
ABC concludes that it should recognize 7% per Customer product sale until it
becomes probable Customer will not sell at least 30,001 units. If, for example,
at the end of Year 2, it becomes probable that Customer will not sell more than
30,000 units, ABC will recognize a cumulative effect adjustment to recognize
previously deferred royalties to reflect that (a) it now expects to be entitled to
8% per Customer product sale and (b) use of that rate does not carry the risk of
a significant revenue reversal.



                  Question F410
                  In an increasing royalty rate scenario, should the
                  entity recognize revenue at its expected ‘blended’
                  rate?
Interpretive response: No. The royalties recognition constraint precludes
recognition of royalty amounts before the customer’s subsequent sales or
usage occurs. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to recognize royalties at an
anticipated higher ‘blended’ rate.



                  Example F410.1
                  Increasing royalty rate
ABC Corp. enters into a five-year arrangement to license software to Customer.
The software license provides the customer with a right to use the ABC’s
software (see Questions F10 and F20). The consideration for the license is a
sales-based royalty of 2% of Customer’s gross sales to end customers of
products that include ABC’s software for the first 10,000 products sold; 4% for
the next 10,000 products sold; and 5% for all products sold thereafter. ABC
expects based on relevant, objective evidence that Customer will sell between
26,000 and 29,000 products that includes ABC’s software. The lower initial
royalty rate was agreed by ABC in order to permit Customer to sell its products
initially at a lower price point to generate demand.
Despite the fact that ABC has relevant, objective evidence suggesting that, on a
blended rate basis, it will be entitled to more than 2% per product sold, ABC
does not estimate a blended rate to apply to the first 10,000 unit sales of
Customer’s product. ABC recognizes a royalty of 2% on each sale of a
Customer product until 10,000 products are sold.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         616
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                  Question F420
                  How should a software entity attribute revenue
                  from a sales- or usage-based royalty subject to the
                  royalties constraint allocable to a performance
                  obligation satisfied over time?
Interpretive response: A software entity may enter into a contract with a
customer to grant the customer a software license and provide one or more
other services (e.g. software-related services, such as PCS or hosting services)
that are satisfied over time. If the only consideration in the contract is a sales- or
usage-based royalty, the question arises as to how to apply the royalties
constraint (paragraph 606-10-55-65) to the contract when the software
license(s) is (are) the predominant item(s) to which that sales- or usage-based
royalty relates.
Example 60 to Topic 606 (paragraphs 606-10-55-393 – 55-394) illustrates that
Topic 606 requires the entity to allocate the sales- or usage-based royalty to the
separate performance obligations in the contract. This allocation would occur
based on the stand-alone selling prices of the performance obligations. Because
the only consideration in the contract is the sales- or usage-based royalty, the
entity would not be able to allocate the royalty entirely to only one or some of
the performance obligations in the contract.
Assuming the software license is transferred to the customer before royalties
are earned – i.e. the entity’s performance in transferring control of the software
license is complete before royalties are earned – the entity will recognize the
portion of each royalty earned that is allocated to the software license when the
customer’s subsequent sale or usage occurs.
Recognition of the portion of each royalty allocated to a performance obligation
satisfied over time will often, but not always, occur when the customer’s
subsequent sales or usage occur. This is because there are a number of
pathways provided within Topic 606 that would result in recognition of royalties
allocated to a service obligation that is satisfied over time. For example:
— If the allocated portion of the royalty reasonably reflects the value to the
  customer of the entity’s performance to which the earned royalties relate, it
  would be reasonable to recognize the allocated portion of the royalty earned
  when the customer’s subsequent sales or usage occur based on applying
  the measure of progress practical expedient in paragraph 606-10-55-18 (i.e.
  the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient). Questions F280 – F330 address
  considerations relevant to determining whether an entity can apply the ‘as-
  invoiced’ practical expedient.
— If the service obligation is a series of distinct services (e.g. most technical
  support, unspecified update/upgrade/enhancement and hosting service
  performance obligations will be series of distinct services), allocation of the
  service portion of the earned royalties to each distinct service period (e.g.
  each day or month that the service is being provided) may be permitted
  based on the guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-40. Question C140
  discusses considerations for determining whether certain software-related
  service obligations constitute a series of distinct services. Chapter E –
  Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         617
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




      contract discusses the relevant considerations in determining whether a
      software entity should allocate variable consideration to the distinct goods
      or services within a series in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-40.
— The Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2016-10 (BC71) highlights that the ‘later
  of’ provision in paragraph 606-10-55-65(b) that comes into play in scenarios
  such as the subject of this question “is merely intended to ensure that the
  royalties guidance does not subvert one of the key principles of Topic 606,
  which is to recognize revenue only when (or as) an entity satisfies a
  performance obligation.” BC71 further elaborates that, “An entity
  recognizes revenue from a sales- or usage-based royalty when (or as) the
  customer’s subsequent sales or usage occur unless recognition in that
  manner would accelerate the recognition of revenue for the performance
  obligation to which the royalty solely or partially relates ahead of the entity’s
  performance toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation
  based on an appropriate measure of progress.” Example 57 (paragraphs
  606-10-55-375 – 55-382) and Example 61 (paragraphs 606-10-55-395 – 55-
  399) each illustrate a scenario in which the entity recognizes a sales-based
  royalty that relates solely to a performance obligation satisfied over time
  when the customer’s subsequent sales occur. Each example does so on
  the basis that “recognition of the royalty fees as the customer’s
  subsequent sales occur reasonably depict the entity’s progress toward
  complete satisfaction of the license performance obligation”, rather than
  with reliance upon either the practical expedient in paragraph 606-10-55-18
  or the variable consideration allocation guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-40.
  Therefore, even if neither of the approaches outlined in the preceding two
  bullets apply, recognition of the royalties allocated to the over-time
  performance obligation would still be recognized when the customer’s
  subsequent sales or usage occur if the royalties are expected to become
  due in a manner that reasonably approximates an appropriate measure of
  progress for measuring satisfaction of the performance obligation in
  accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-31.
It may be the case in some circumstances, however, that none of the
approaches above are appropriate. For example, this may occur because the
royalty rate changes during the contract in a manner that does not reflect
changing value to the customer of the entity’s services (see paragraph BC71 in
ASU 2016-10). In that case, we believe either of the two following approaches
would be acceptable:
— The entity would be permitted to estimate total expected royalties that will
  be earned and allocated to the over-time performance obligation(s) in
  accordance with paragraphs 606-10-32-5 – 32-9. In this case, the entity
  would not subject that estimate to the constraint on variable consideration
  because, as outlined in paragraph BC71, the general constraint does not
  apply when the royalties recognition constraint applies. The entity would
  recognize revenue using an appropriate measure of progress applied
  against that estimate of earned and allocated royalties, adjusting the
  estimate each reporting period. By way of example, in a contract to provide
  a customer with a software license and a software-related service satisfied
  over time for which the only consideration is a sales- or usage-based
  royalty, the entity would estimate total royalties it will earn over the license
  period (e.g. $100,000), determine the portion of that amount allocable to



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         618
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




      the service (e.g. $20,000), and recognize that $20,000 over the service
      period using an appropriate measure of progress (subject to the
      requirement that cumulative revenue recognition for the service should
      never exceed 20% of royalties earned based on the customer’s subsequent
      sales or usage).
— The portion of the royalty amount earned each period during which the
  over-time performance obligation will be satisfied (e.g. $2,000 in the first
  quarter of the software-related service period) should be recognized using
  an appropriate measure of progress over the remainder of the period the
  over-time performance obligation will be satisfied. For example, if $100 in
  royalties are earned and allocated to a software-related service on Day 1 of
  a three-year service period, that $100 will be recognized over the entire
  three-year service period; if $200 in royalties are earned and allocated to the
  software-related service on the first day of Year 2 of the three-year service
  period, that $200 will be recognized over the remaining two years of the
  service period. Under this approach, the entity would not estimate future
  royalties to be earned.



                  Example F420.1
                  Usage-based fees in a software licensing
                  arrangement with PCS
ABC Corp. licenses transaction-processing software to financial institutions.
ABC executes a three-year term license with Customer and also agrees to
provide technical support and unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements to the software for the full three-year term. ABC will receive
only usage-based fees of $0.05 per transaction processed by the software – i.e.
there are no other fees payable to ABC under the contract. There is no
guaranteed minimum for the usage-based fees. Further:
— ABC concludes that the technical support and the unspecified updates,
  upgrades and enhancements are a single, stand-ready, PCS performance
  obligation (see Questions C130 and C150).
— ABC concludes that the software license and the PCS are distinct from
  each other (see Questions C160 and C170) and, therefore, the contract
  includes two performance obligations (the software license and PCS).
— The software is functional IP and provides Customer with a right to use
  ABC’s software (see Questions F10 and Question F20). The three-year
  term commences immediately upon transfer to Customer of a copy of the
  software along with the necessary software key, which are both provided at
  contract inception. Therefore, Customer obtains control of the software
  license on the contract inception date.
— The PCS performance obligation constitutes a series of distinct PCS service
  periods (see Question C140).
ABC concludes that the royalties recognition constraint applies to the royalty
(see overview discussion preceding Question F340, and Question F380).
Therefore, despite the fact that ABC may be able to reasonably estimate a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         619
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




minimum amount of transaction-based fees to which it will be entitled from
transferring the license to Customer (e.g. on the basis of similar licensing
arrangements with other customers), ABC is prohibited from recognizing the
transaction-based fees before Customer’s usage takes place.
Because there are two separate performance obligations, ABC must determine
the stand-alone selling prices for the license and the PCS and allocate the
usage-based fees to those two performance obligations. In this example,
assume the stand-alone selling prices of the license and the PCS are $200,000
and $120,000, respectively.
Therefore, each period when royalties are earned, 62.5% of those royalties are
allocated to the software license that was transferred to the customer at
contract inception and 37.5% of those royalties are allocated to the PCS.
The 62.5% portion allocated to the software license is recognized as revenue
when the customer’s usage occurs in accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-
65(a) because the software license performance obligation is completely
satisfied at contract inception.
The 37.5% portion of royalties earned each period that is allocated to the PCS is
recognized as the customer’s usage occurs. ABC concludes that:
— the 37.5% portion of the royalties earned specifically relates to ABC’s
  provision of the PCS based on consideration of the terms of the contract
  and the stand-alone selling price of the PCS; and
— allocating those royalties to each distinct PCS period (e.g. each month or
  even each day) within the series of distinct service periods that comprise
  the PCS performance obligation is consistent with the transaction price
  allocation objective in paragraph 606-10-32-28. This is on the basis that
  (1) customers’ with higher expected transaction volumes generally have
  a greater need for technical support; and (2) updates, upgrades and
  enhancements generally provide greater benefit to a customer using
  the software more extensively – e.g. an upgrade increasing processing
  speed will provide proportionally greater benefit to a customer
  processing 100,000 transactions per period than one processing only
  10,000 transactions per period.
ABC further concludes that recognition of the allocated royalties when those
royalties are earned is appropriate because, on the basis of relevant experience
with similar arrangements, even though it expects transaction volumes to
fluctuate throughout the license period, it does not expect total royalties that
will be earned to be significantly front- or back-loaded. Therefore, recognition of
allocated royalties as earned is unlikely to result in a recognition pattern that
substantively accelerates revenue recognition for the PCS ahead of the entity’s
expected performance over the PCS period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         620
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                   Question F430
                   Can a software entity apply the royalty exception
                   when the royalty is calculated on a financial metric
                   other than sales?
Interpretive response: It depends on whether the metric is considered ‘sales-
based’.
In certain software licenses, royalties are calculated based on financial
statement metrics other than sales. For example, a software entity may be
entitled to a fee based on a fixed percentage of gross profit generated by the
customer for the term of the contract. The contract might define gross profit as
net sales less costs of goods sold.
When the metric is ‘sales-based’, we believe the exception should be applied.
Determining if the royalty exception is sales-based depends on whether the
metric is directly attributable to revenue or sales volumes and how the
customer uses the IP.
A metric such as gross profit, defined as sales less cost of goods sold, is
generally directly attributable to revenue and sales volumes. To the extent cost
of goods sold is clearly defined and its variability is predominantly based on
revenue, an entity can apply the royalty exception.
However, the royalty exception may not apply if the royalty calculation includes
other items such that a direct correlation to revenue no longer exists, or if it is
based predominantly on something other than sales. Examples include
calculations incorporating significant fixed costs (e.g. sales department
compensation), other adjustments (e.g. decline in value of goods,
obsolescence, damage), allocations between multiple goods or services that
are not defined or applied consistently, and changes to inventory cost
method used.
For other profit metrics (e.g. EBITDA, net income), entities should consider the
degree to which the metric is affected by changes in sales versus allocations of
other costs when determining whether use of the royalty exception is
appropriate.



                   Question F440
                   How is the transaction price allocated in an
                   arrangement that includes sales- or usage-based
                   royalties subject to a guaranteed minimum?
Interpretive response: An entity may enter into a contract with multiple
performance obligations that consist of a license of IP and another good or
service that is transferred over a different time period. If requirements to
allocate variable consideration entirely to one performance obligation are not
met, an entity allocates the sales- or usage-based royalties to multiple
performance obligations. The assessment can be particularly challenging when




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         621
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




the contract includes fixed consideration, which can be in the form of a
minimum guaranteed royalty.
Topic 606 is not clear about how an entity allocates that consideration to its
performance obligations when the contract includes sales- or usage-based
royalties predominantly associated with a license of IP and a guaranteed
minimum. Multiple approaches could be acceptable if they are consistent with
the allocation objective (see Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to
the performance obligations in the contract) and application of the royalty
exception. We believe the following are examples of acceptable approaches.
Approach 1: Allocate the fixed consideration and variable consideration
separately based on relative stand-alone selling prices
Approach 1 is consistent with Example 35, Case B of Topic 606, which
illustrates allocating royalties and fixed consideration to two distinct licenses. In
that example, the entity allocates the fixed consideration to the performance
obligations at contract inception on a relative stand-alone selling price basis and
then allocates the royalties on a relative basis when the sales or usage occurs.
The same relative allocation percentage is used for the fixed and variable
consideration.
Approach 2: Estimate the total transaction price (including royalties) and
allocate that amount to each performance obligation subject to a
cumulative recognition constraint
Under Approach 2, the entity estimates an unconstrained transaction price (that
includes estimated royalties and fixed consideration) and allocates that amount
to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis.
Further, under this approach the entity applies the royalty exception on a
cumulative basis. This means that when an entity satisfies or partially satisfies a
performance obligation, it recognizes the lesser of the amount allocated to the
performance obligation and the consideration to which it is currently entitled
under the contract (inclusive of the fixed fees and royalties that it has already
earned).
Under Approach 2, an entity continuously updates its estimate of the total
consideration to which it expects to be entitled. However, the entity does not
apply the variable consideration constraint (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine
the transaction price). This is because the variable amounts are subject to the
royalty exception rather than the variable consideration constraint. However,
this approach could result in a reversal of revenue if the entity’s estimates
change significantly as a result of re-allocating the decrease in consideration to
performance obligations that have been previously satisfied (see Example
F440.2).
Regardless of the approach an entity uses, it needs to disclose significant
judgments made in applying the guidance in Topic 606 regarding the
determination and timing of revenue recognition. Moreover, it should apply the
approach consistently to similar contracts.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         622
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                   Example F440.1
                   Allocation of guaranteed minimum among multiple
                   performance obligations
Tech Company enters into a three-year arrangement to license its technology to
Customer along with a promise to provide when-and-if-available upgrades
developed during the license term.
Tech Company concludes that the license and promise to provide when-and-if-
available upgrades are two distinct performance obligations.
— The license provides Customer with a right to use the technology, which is
  a performance obligation satisfied at a point in time.
— The right to when-and-if-available upgrades is a performance obligation
  satisfied over time because Customer simultaneously receives and
  consumes the benefits of having access to when-and-if-available upgrades
  continuously throughout the contract term.
Tech Company receives a royalty of 10% of Customer’s sales subject to a
minimum guaranteed amount of $10,000. Tech Company estimates that the
total consideration (fixed plus variable) will be $50,000.
Tech Company estimates the stand-alone selling price of the license and when-
and-if-available upgrades to be $15,000 and $35,000, respectively. Tech
Company concludes that the royalty is predominantly associated with a license
of IP because both performance obligations are related to providing IP (see
Question F380).
Customer’s gross sales and the related royalties earned each year are shown in
the table. This information is not known at the beginning of the contract.

                                       Year 1                 Year 2                  Year 3                  Total
  Gross sales                          $150,000               $250,000                $100,000                $500,000
  Royalties                            $ 15,000               $ 25,000                $10,000                 $ 50,000

Approach 1: Allocate fixed and variable consideration separately
Tech Company allocates the fixed fee (guaranteed minimum) of $10,000 on a
relative stand-alone selling price basis as future usage and sales occur.

  Performance                            Stand-alone                                          Allocation of
  obligation                             selling price                          %             guaranteed minimum
  License                                $15,000                              30%             $ 3,000
  Upgrades                               $35,000                              70%             $ 7,000
  Total                                  $50,000                             100%             $10,000

The estimated variable royalty (in excess of the minimum) of $40,000 is
allocated between the two performance obligations on a relative stand-alone
selling price basis as future usage and sales occur.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                         623
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Tech Company recognizes the variable amounts allocated to the when-and-if-
available upgrades in the period the amounts are earned because the
performance obligation is a series of distinct time periods (see Chapter C – Step
2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract) and Tech Company
meets the criteria to allocate the fees directly to the distinct periods in which
the sales occur as follows:
— the fees relate to the customer’s past usage and the license and when-and-
  if-available upgrades; and
— the allocation is consistent with the allocation objective because the fee is
  consistent from period to period and the greater usage of the customer
  reflects additional value to the customer (see Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate
  the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract). [606-10-
       32-40]

The following table summarizes the allocation and recognition for each
performance obligation during the three-year contract term.

                                                     End of              End of              End of
                                 Inception           Year 1              Year 2              Year 3              Total
  Fixed
  License                        $3,0001             -                   -                   -                   $ 3,000
  Upgrades                       -                   $2,3332             $ 2,3332            $ 2,3332            $ 7,000
  Variable
  License                        -                   $1,5003             $ 7,5005            $ 3,0007            $12,000
  Upgrades                       -                   $3,5004             $17,5006            $ 7,0008            $28,000
  Cumulative revenue
  License                        $3,000              $4,500              $12,000             $15,000             $15,000
  Upgrades                       -                   $5,833              $25,666             $35,000             $35,000
  Notes:
  1.    $10,000 minimum × 30% allocation. This amount is recognized immediately upon
        transfer of the license because it is functional IP recognized at a point in time.
  2.    $10,000 minimum × 70% allocation × 1/3 complete. Only a portion is recognized each
        period because this amount is recognized over time.
  3.    $5,000 royalty above the minimum ($15,000 – $10,000) × 30% allocation.
  4.    $5,000 royalty above the minimum ($15,000 – $10,000) × 70% allocation.
  5.    $25,000 additional royalty × 30% allocation.
  6.    $25,000 additional royalty × 70% allocation.
  7.    $10,000 additional royalty × 30% allocation.
  8.    $10,000 additional royalty × 70% allocation.


Approach 2: Allocate fixed and variable consideration together
Tech Company allocates the $50,000 estimated transaction price on a relative
stand-alone selling price basis as follows:
— $15,000 to the license; and
— $35,000 to the when-and-if-available upgrades.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                               624
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




When (or as) the performance obligations are satisfied, Tech Company
recognizes as revenue the lesser of the amount allocated to the performance
obligations satisfied or the amount that is no longer subject to the royalty
constraint.

                                  Inception                Year 1              Year 2              Year 3                Total
  Allocated to:
  License                            $15,0001                       -                   -                   -        $15,000
  Upgrades                                      -        $11,6673            $11,6673            $11,6673            $35,000
  Cumulative                         $15,000             $26,667             $38,333             $50,000                        n/a
  Royalty due:
  Annual                             $10,0002            $ 5,0004            $25,0005            $10,0006            $40,000
  Cumulative                         $10,000             $15,000             $40,000             $50,000                        n/a
  Lesser of amount
  allocated to
  satisfied PO and
  royalties due                      $10,000             $15,000             $38,333             $50,000                        n/a
  Less: previously
  recognized
  revenue                                       -        ($10,000)          ($15,000)           ($38,333)                       n/a
  Revenue
  recognized                         $10,000              $ 5,000           $ 23,333             $11,667             $50,000
  Notes:
  1.    The license is functional IP that is transferred at a point in time. As such, the
        performance obligation is satisfied upon transfer and the amount allocated to that
        performance obligation is $15,000.
  2.    There is a guaranteed minimum of $10,000 in the contract.
  3.    $35,000 allocated to the upgrades / 3 years.
  4.    $15,000 in royalties earned during Year 1 – $10,000 minimum already recorded.
  5.    $25,000 additional royalties earned during Year 2.
  6.    $10,000 additional royalties earned during Year 3.




                   Example F440.2
                   Allocation of guaranteed minimum among multiple
                   performance obligations – revised estimates
Assume the same facts as in Example F440.1. At the beginning of Year 2, Tech
Company revises its estimate of the transaction price to $25,000 as follows:
— Year 1 - $15,000
— Year 2 - $5,000
— Year 3 - $5,000.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                               625
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




Approach 1: Allocate fixed and variable consideration separately
Under Approach 1, Tech Company does not need to adjust the amount of
revenue recognized because it only accounts for the variable consideration once
usage occurs. The table illustrates the amount recognized under the revised
estimate.

                                                        End of              End of                 End of
                             Inception                  Year 1              Year 2                 Year 3                Total

  Fixed

  License                        $3,000                          -                    -                      -       $ 3,000
  Upgrades                                 -            $2,333            $ 2,3331               $ 2,3331            $ 7,000

  Variable

  License                                  -            $1,500            $ 1,5002               $ 1,5002            $ 4,500
  Upgrades                                 -            $3,500            $ 3,5003               $ 3,5003            $10,500

  Cumulative
  Revenue

  License                        $3,000                 $4,500            $ 6,000                $ 7,500             $ 7,500
  Upgrades                                 -            $5,833            $11,666                $17,500             $17,500
  See Example F480.1 for an explanation of the figures at inception and at the end of Year 1.
  Notes:
  1.    $10,000 minimum × 70% allocation × 1/3 complete. Only a portion is recognized each
        period because this is recognized over time.
  2.    $5,000 additional royalty × 30% allocation.
  3.    $5,000 additional royalty × 70% allocation.


Approach 2: Allocate fixed and variable consideration together
Under Approach 2, Tech Company makes a cumulative adjustment based on
the updated estimate and reallocates the $25,000 estimated transaction price
on a relative stand-alone selling price basis as follows:
— $7,500 (30%) to the license; and
— $17,500 (70%) to the upgrades.


                                                End of                             End of            End of
                         Inception              Year 1         True-up             Year 2            Year 3              Total
  Allocated
  to:
  License                   $15,000                      -    $ (7,500)1                     -                   -     $7,500
  Upgrades                             -       $11,667        $ (5,833)2         $ 5,8332          $ 5,8332          $17,500
  Cumulative                $15,000            $26,667          $13,334           $19,167          $25,000                      n/a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                          Revenue for software and SaaS                                               626
    F. Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation




                                                End of                             End of            End of
                         Inception              Year 1         True-up             Year 2            Year 3              Total
  Royalty
  earned:
  Annual                    $10,000          $ 5,000                       -     $ 5,0003          $ 5,0004          $25,000
  Cumulative                $10,000           $15,000           $15,000           $20,000          $25,000                      n/a
  Lesser of
  amount
  allocated to
  satisfied PO
  and
  royalties
  earned                    $10,000           $15,000           $13,334           $19,167          $25,000                      n/a
  Less:
  previously
  recognized
  revenue                              -     ($10,000)         ($15,000)         ($13,333)         ($19,167)                    n/a
  Revenue
  recognized                $10,000           $ 5,000         ($ 1,666)           $ 5,833          $ 5,833           $25,000
  See Example F480.1 for an explanation of the figures at inception and at the end of Year 1.
  Notes:
  1.    The revised revenue allocation for the license is $7,500. As such, the amount already
        recognized is reduced to equal $7,500.
  2.    The revised revenue allocation for the upgrades is $17,500. As such, the amount
        already recognized is reduced to equal $5,833, and thereafter an additional $5,833
        ($17,500 × 1/3) is recognized each year.
  3.    $5,000 additional royalties earned during Year 2.
  4.    $5,000 additional royalties earned during Year 3.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                     Revenue for software and SaaS                 627
                                                                                          G. Contract modifications




G. Contract modifications
   Questions and Examples
   Identifying a contract modification
   Q&A G10                   When is a contract modification approved?
   Q&A G20                   If parties to a contract have agreed to a change in scope, but
                             not the corresponding change in the transaction price, has
                             there been a contract modification?
                             Example G20.1: Assessing whether a contract modification is
                             approved
   Q&A G30                   If an arrangement that has already been determined to meet
                             the Topic 606 contract existence criteria is subsequently
                             modified, is an entity required to reassess whether the
                             modified contract still meets the criteria to be considered a
                             contract?
   Q&A G35                   If the parties enter into a new contract at or near the same time
                             as terminating the original contract, is the new contract a
                             modification?
   Q&A G40                   Is the exercise of a customer option for additional goods or
                             services (including a renewal) that is considered a marketing
                             offer, and not a material right, a modification of the existing
                             contract?
   Q&A G50                   When does a contract claim result in a contract modification?
   Accounting for contract modifications
                             Illustrative example G1: Contract modification that is a
                             separate contract
   Q&A G60                   When evaluating whether contract consideration for additional,
                             distinct goods or services reflects the stand-alone selling price
                             of those goods or services, should an entity use the stand-
                             alone selling price at the modification date or at the original
                             contract’s inception?
   Q&A G70                   What evidence is required to substantiate that a deviation from
                             stand-alone selling price reflects an ‘appropriate adjustment’ for
                             the circumstances of a particular contract?
                             Example G70.1: SaaS arrangement renewal accounted for as a
                             separate contract
   Q&A G75                   How should an entity account for a blend-and- extend
                             modification?
                             Example G75.1: Blend-and-extend contract modification
   Q&A G80                   When additional goods or services are priced at a discount from
                             stand-alone selling price and the discount relates to past



   © 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
   member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 628
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                          performance issues how should the entity account for that
                          modification?
                          Example G80.1: Contract to purchase additional software
                          licenses at a discount due to bugs
                          Example G80.2: Contract to extend SaaS arrangement that
                          includes a discount for past performance issues
Q&A G90                   How should an entity evaluate the criterion in paragraph 606-
                          10-25-12(b) when the stand-alone selling price of the additional
                          distinct good or service is highly variable or uncertain?
                          Example G90.1: Evaluating whether additional consideration
                          reflects the stand-alone selling prices of added goods and
                          services
                          Example G90.2: Evaluating whether additional consideration
                          reflects the stand-alone selling prices of added goods and
                          services that do not all have highly variable or uncertain stand-
                          alone selling prices
Q&A G100                  When a modification is accounted for prospectively in
                          accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a), is a contract asset
                          that exists at the modification date written off?
                          Example G100.1: Contract asset in a modification accounted
                          for prospectively as a termination of the original contract and
                          the creation of a new contract
Q&A G110                  How should an entity account for a modification that decreases
                          the scope of a contract?
                          Example G110.1: Decrease in scope (and price) of PCS
                          Example G110.2: Partial termination of SaaS contract – no
                          customer termination right
                          Example G110.3: Partial termination of SaaS contract that
                          includes customer termination right subject to termination
                          penalty
Q&A G120                  How should an entity account for a contract modification that
                          consists of a change in price only?
                          Example G120.1: Price decrease – SaaS arrangements
                          Example G120.2: Change in price in software customization
                          contract
Q&A G130                  What is the appropriate accounting for a modification that adds
                          rights granted under a software license?
Q&A G131                  What is the appropriate accounting for a modification that
                          decreases rights granted under a software license?
                          Example G131.1: Contract modification revoking rights
                          previously transferred
Q&A G132                  What is the appropriate accounting for a modification granting
                          the customer the right to convert a software license to SaaS?



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 629
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




Q&A G140                  Can an entity recognize license revenue for a period that
                          extends beyond the original license term before the beginning
                          of the extended period if the entity and the customer terminate
                          the original license and enter into a ‘new’ license that includes
                          the remainder of the original term plus the extension period?
                          Example G140.1: Term software license terminated and new
                          license with same rights entered into
                          Example G140.2: Term software license terminated and new
                          rights of use granted
Q&A G150                  How should an entity account for modifications that include
                          some goods or services that are distinct from those provided
                          pre-modification and some that are not distinct?
                          Example G150.1: Partially satisfied performance obligation and
                          additional distinct goods or services (combination of methods)
                          Example G150.2: Partially satisfied performance obligation and
                          additional distinct software license (combination of methods)
Q&A G160                  In the case of an unpriced change order that has been
                          determined to constitute a contract modification, is the
                          expected payment that has not yet been approved variable
                          consideration?
                          Example G160.1: Accounting for a contract modification
                          resulting from an unpriced change order




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 630
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




This chapter is organized into distinct sections as follows:
— Identifying a contract modification
— Accounting for contract modifications



Identifying a contract modification
Overview

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Contract Modifications
25-10 A contract modification is a change in the scope or price (or both) of a
contract that is approved by the parties to the contract. In some industries and
jurisdictions, a contract modification may be described as a change order, a
variation, or an amendment. A contract modification exists when the parties to
a contract approve a modification that either creates new or changes existing
enforceable rights and obligations of the parties to the contract. A contract
modification could be approved in writing, by oral agreement, or implied by
customary business practices. If the parties to the contract have not approved
a contract modification, an entity shall continue to apply the guidance in this
Topic to the existing contract until the contract modification is approved.
25-11 A contract modification may exist even though the parties to the
contract have a dispute about the scope or price (or both) of the modification or
the parties have approved a change in the scope of the contract but have not
yet determined the corresponding change in price. In determining whether the
rights and obligations that are created or changed by a modification are
enforceable, an entity shall consider all relevant facts and circumstances
including the terms of the contract and other evidence. If the parties to a
contract have approved a change in the scope of the contract but have not yet
determined the corresponding change in price, an entity shall estimate the
change to the transaction price arising from the modification in accordance
with paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through 32-9 on estimating variable consideration
and paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through 32-13 on constraining estimates of
variable consideration.


A contract modification is a change in the scope or price of a contract, or both.
This may in practice be described as a change order, a variation or an
amendment, but however papered, the substance should be evaluated over
form (e.g. see Question G140).
However, not all changes in price are contract modifications. The facts and
circumstances causing the change in transaction price affects whether the
pricing change is accounted for as a contract modification. The resolution of
variability in the amount of expected consideration is accounted for as a change
in transaction price (see Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the
performance obligations in the contract; Changes in the transaction price) [606-
10-32-42 – 32-45]




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 631
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




When a contract modification is approved, it changes the, or creates new,
enforceable rights and obligations of the parties to the contract. Consistent with
the determination of whether a contract exists in Step 1 of the model, this
approval may be written, oral or implied by customary business practices, and
should be enforceable under law.
If the parties have not approved a contract modification, then an entity
continues to apply the requirements of Topic 606 to the existing contract until
approval is obtained.
If the parties have approved a change in scope, but have not yet determined the
corresponding change in price – i.e. an unpriced change order – then the entity
estimates the change to the transaction price by applying the guidance on
estimating variable consideration and constraining the transaction price.
The assessment of whether a contract modification exists focuses on whether
the new or amended rights and obligations that arise under the modification are
enforceable. This determination requires an entity to consider all relevant facts
and circumstances, including the terms of the contract and applicable laws and
regulations. We believe that an entity should assess whether it has the right to
be compensated for satisfying the modified rights and obligations in the
contract. This may require significant judgment in some jurisdictions or for
some modifications – particularly if the parties to the contract have a dispute
about the scope or the price. In cases of significant uncertainty about
enforceability, written approval and/or legal representation may be required
to support a conclusion that the parties to the contract have approved
the modification.
The example below from Topic 606 illustrates the evaluation of an unapproved
change in scope and price.




                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Example 9 — Unapproved Change in Scope and Price
55-134 An entity enters into a contract with a customer to construct a building
on customer-owned land. The contract states that the customer will provide
the entity with access to the land within 30 days of contract inception.
However, the entity was not provided access until 120 days after contract
inception because of storm damage to the site that occurred after contract
inception. The contract specifically identifies any delay (including force
majeure) in the entity’s access to customer-owned land as an event that
entitles the entity to compensation that is equal to actual costs incurred as a
direct result of the delay. The entity is able to demonstrate that the specific
direct costs were incurred as a result of the delay in accordance with the terms
of the contract and prepares a claim. The customer initially disagreed with the
entity’s claim.
55-135 The entity assesses the legal basis of the claim and determines, on the
basis of the underlying contractual terms, that it has enforceable rights.
Consequently, it accounts for the claim as a contract modification in
accordance with paragraphs 606-10-25-10 through 25-13. The modification



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 632
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




does not result in any additional goods and services being provided to the
customer. In addition, all of the remaining goods and services after the
modification are not distinct and form part of a single performance obligation.
Consequently, the entity accounts for the modification in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-13(b) by updating the transaction price and the measure
of progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. The
entity considers the constraint on estimates of variable consideration in
paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through 32-13 when estimating the transaction price.



Questions & answers

                  Question G10
                  When is a contract modification approved?


Interpretive response: In general, determining that a modification has been
approved is consistent with the determination made about whether a contract
exists (see Chapter B – Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer).
Approval occurs when the legally enforceable rights and obligations of a
contract change. The assessment of whether a modification exists may require
significant judgment in some jurisdictions or for some arrangements,
particularly if the parties to the contract have a dispute about the scope or price.
In cases of significant uncertainty about enforceability, written approval and/or
legal representation may be required to support a conclusion that the parties to
the contract have approved the modification.
When assessing the enforceability of the modifications and the contract
existence criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 for of a contract modification, some
additional, relevant considerations may include whether:
— the contractual terms and conditions are commensurate with the
  uncertainty, if any, about the customer or the entity performing in
  accordance with the modification (i.e. about the customer paying for or
  approving the modifications or about the entity being able to successfully
  fulfill its obligations);
— there is experience of the customer (or other similar customers) not fulfilling
  its obligations in similar modifications under similar circumstances; and/or
— the entity has previously chosen not to enforce its rights in similar
  modifications with the customer (or similar customers) under similar
  circumstances.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 633
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Question G20
                  If parties to a contract have agreed to a change in
                  scope, but not the corresponding change in the
                  transaction price, has there been a contract
                  modification?
Interpretive response: Change orders are modifications of an original contract
that effectively change the provisions of the contract. Some change orders are
approved by the entity and customer on a timely basis, while others are not
approved until later, perhaps even after completion of the project. Approval,
whether related to the scope of the contract, the price or both, can occur in a
variety of ways provided approval creates legally enforceable rights and
obligations for both parties.
Unpriced change orders often occur where the parties agree on a change (or
changes) to be made to the scope of a contract (e.g. changing the original
features, functionality or configuration of licensed software), but the extent of
effort necessary to effect the change is not known initially. In order to account
for a contract modification that is an unpriced change order, both parties must
have approved the change in the scope of the contract, and the entity must also
(a) have an expectation that a change in price will be agreed to by the customer
and (b) that the changed fees, once agreed, are probable of collection. The
entity’s expectation should be supported by evidence of the customer’s
commitment to fulfill its obligations under the contract (i.e. to pay for its goods
and/or services). The entity’s analysis with respect to its expectation that the
price of the contract modification will be approved and that collectibility is
probable should be consistent with how it evaluates (a) whether a customer is
committed to perform under a contract and (b) whether collectibility of the
transaction price is probable when identifying whether a contract exists (see
Chapter B – Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer). However, we
would generally expect collectibility will be less of a consideration given the
existing contract and customer relationship (unless there has been a
significant deterioration in the customer’s credit standing, in which case it
may be necessary to reassess whether there is still an existing contract with
the customer).
In the Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC39), the Boards clarified that
their intention was not to preclude revenue recognition for unpriced change
orders if the scope of the work has been approved and thus the entity has a
right to payment for the additional work performed. The Boards affirmed that
the consideration need not be fixed to identify the payment terms. An entity’s
expectation that the price of the modification will be approved could be based
on a framework in the existing contract (e.g. master contract or other governing
agreement), its historical experience with the customer and/or with similar
contracts or its understanding of the law in the relevant jurisdiction. Topic 606
doesn’t specify how an entity should arrive at that expectation, rather that it
must have that expectation to conclude that an unpriced change order alters the
parties’ enforceable rights and obligations in the contract. Situation-specific
facts and circumstances will often drive an entity’s conclusion as to whether it
can account for an unpriced change order as an approved contract modification,
or whether it would wait until the change order is approved formally (e.g.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 634
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




through a dually signed amendment). Therefore, an entity normally would need
to develop processes and internal controls to support (1) its conclusions on the
approval of the change in scope, (2) that there is a reasonable expectation of
payment and (3) an estimated price for the change order in accordance with the
variable consideration guidance.



                  Example G20.1
                  Assessing whether a contract modification is
                  approved
ABC Corp. licenses trust asset management system software called Product B.
Product B enables users, typically large financial institutions, to access and
value individual US dollar denominated trust account portfolios on a real-time
basis. Product B functions as designed without any customization or
modification services and can be implemented without ABC’s assistance in
most cases.
ABC previously entered into a specific contract with Customer, a large bank, to
grant a license to the Product B software and to provide services to modify the
customer’s instance of the software. This includes modification of the software
code and configuration of certain modified and off-the-shelf settings to allow
Customer to access and value its trust account portfolios in multiple foreign
currencies in addition to US dollars. ABC expects that it will take approximately
18 months to perform the services.
Six months into performing the services, Customer informs ABC that it wishes
to amend the scope of the services to create additional functionality within the
software not previously contemplated in the initial contract, as well as to
change some of the planned configurations of the software. ABC and Customer
personnel discuss and agree to enact these changes and start preparing a
formal amendment to the contract.
To determine whether to account for the contract modification at this point (i.e.
before the amendment has been executed), ABC assesses whether a
modification has been approved – i.e. whether communications between the
parties have created new, or changed existing, enforceable rights and
obligations under the contract.
In making this determination, ABC considers the following:
— Although ABC and Customer have not executed a contract amendment or
  formal change order for the change in specifications and the required time
  and resources necessary to complete the request, changes of this nature
  are common in similar contracts.
— ABC’s experience in similar contracts is that when changes resulting from
  redesign have occurred, customers have compensated ABC for the
  incremental costs plus a margin, provided ABC has been able to
  demonstrate that the additional costs are reasonable given the scope of the
  changes.
— Despite the fact that there has been no formal written agreement on the
  change in scope or price, after consultation with its legal counsel, ABC



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 635
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




      determines that there is legal precedent for enforceability of similar types of
      oral arrangements in the jurisdiction, thus changing the enforceable rights
      and obligations of the contract.
— The contract contains an ‘out of scope’ provision that establishes a
  framework under which work that is agreed to by the parties, but is beyond
  the original scope of the project, can be billed. Therefore, even though ABC
  expects it will negotiate a formal amendment with Customer that will
  establish fees for the change order, a framework exists for ABC to receive
  payment for such work that is approved even if a formal amendment is
  not concluded.
ABC therefore concludes that the contract modification has been approved.
Conversely, if the following facts and circumstances had existed, then ABC may
have concluded that the contract modification had not yet been approved (not
exhaustive):
— There was an absence of legal precedent in the jurisdiction related to oral
  understandings of this nature or ABC’s counsel cannot make a
  determination as to the enforceability of the unpriced change order as a
  matter of law.
— ABC had limited history with similar software customization projects, such
  that it had no experience of successfully negotiating scope changes and
  collecting commensurate additional consideration.
— The contract did not include an ‘out of scope’ provision such that there was
  no framework, separate from executing an amendment to the contract, to
  determine how ABC might be paid for additional efforts undertaken as a
  result of the scope change.
— At the time of the scope change, it was not probable that Customer would
  be willing to pay any incremental fees resulting from the scope changes.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP construction- and production-type ‘contract accounting’,
which applied to software licensing arrangements that included the significant
production, modification or customization of software and other circumstances
where services were essential to the functionality of the licensed software,
unpriced change orders were reflected in the accounting for a contract if
recovery was probable. Some of the factors considered under legacy US GAAP
when evaluating whether recovery was ‘probable’ included:
— the customer’s written approval of the scope of the change order;
— separate documentation for change order costs that are identifiable and
  reasonable; and
— the entity’s experience in negotiating change orders, especially as they
  relate to the specific type of contract and change orders being evaluated.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 636
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




In contrast, outside of ‘contract accounting’ most entities generally did not
account for a contract modification before they had persuasive evidence of an
arrangement and the fees were fixed or determinable.
The contract modification guidance in Topic 606 differs from both the legacy
US GAAP guidance that was applicable to long-term construction- and
production-type contracts and the legacy US GAAP guidance applied to other
software and SaaS arrangements. Consequently, the timing of revenue
recognition associated with contract modifications may change. In particular,
such timing may be accelerated as compared to legacy US GAAP for
arrangements that were not subject to the long-term construction- and
production-type contract guidance. This is because (1) the Topic 606
requirements around enforceability do not require approval of a change order to
follow the entity’s customary business practice for persuasive evidence of an
arrangement and (2) the fees for a change order are not precluded from
recognition before they are fixed or determinable based on the variable
consideration guidance in Topic 606 – see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the
transaction price.



                  Question G30
                  If an arrangement that has already been determined
                  to meet the Topic 606 contract existence criteria is
                  subsequently modified, is an entity required to
                  reassess whether the modified contract still meets
                  the criteria to be considered a contract?
Interpretive response: In general, we believe the criteria in paragraph 606-10-
25-1 would be assessed both (a) to determine that any new rights and
obligations are enforceable and substantive, and (b) that any modifications to
the existing rights and obligations do not render those existing rights and
obligations unenforceable or non-substantive. With respect to (a), we believe it
would be counter-intuitive to not evaluate new rights and obligations through
the same lens as the original rights and obligations in the contract. Meanwhile,
with respect to (b), we believe that a modification of a contract (i.e. assuming
the modification is not a separate contract based on paragraph 606-10-25-12)
would constitute a ‘significant change in facts and circumstances’ such that, in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-5, the entity would reassess the contract
existence criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 for the modified contract. That being
said, we would typically expect an existing contract and customer relationship
to affect the scrutiny an entity would have to apply in assessing the
paragraph 606-10-25-1 criteria. For example, the entity’s prior evaluation of
credit-worthiness when assessing the original contract and the customer’s
timely payment of contract fees to date would likely influence the entity’s
evaluation as to whether the customer is committed to perform its obligations
under the modified contract and whether collectibility is probable.
If a contract modification is determined to be a separate contract, we do not
believe an entity would reassess the criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-1 with
respect to the original contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 637
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                   Question G35
                   If the parties enter into a new contract at or near
                   the same time as terminating the original contract,
                   is the new contract a modification?
Interpretive response: Yes, if the substance is a change in the scope or price
of the original contract. When an entity and customer change the scope or price
of a contract, the change is accounted for as a modification regardless of its
form. The form of that change in scope or price does not have to be papered as
a modification of the existing contract. An entity could terminate a contract and
enter into a new contract and achieve the same economic result as modifying
an existing contract.
Consider the following examples that are structured differently but have the
same economic outcome:
— Scenario 1. ABC Corp. enters into a contract to provide distinct monthly
  services to Customer for three years in exchange for $300 paid upfront.
  After the first year, ABC and Customer agree to amend the contract to add
  two additional years of service for an additional $600 paid at the date of the
  amendment; assume there is not a significant financing component in
  either the original agreement or the modified agreement. After the
  amendment, ABC will provide Customer with services for four more years
  and receive additional consideration of $600.
— Scenario 2. ABC enters into a contract to provide distinct monthly services
  to Customer for three years for $300 paid upfront. After the first year, ABC
  and Customer agree to terminate the original contract with no refund
  payable to Customer and enter into a separate four-year contract to provide
  the same services for $600 in additional consideration paid at the date the
  new contract is entered into; assume there is not a significant financing
  component in either the first or second contract. After the new contract is
  entered into, ABC will provide Customer with services for four more years
  and receive consideration of $600.
If entities were able to avoid the modification guidance by entering into
separate contracts, the timing of revenue recognized could be significantly
different for economically equivalent arrangements. For example, if the
scenarios above are accounted for according to the form rather than the
substance, the accounting would be as follows; assume ABC is using a time-
elapsed measure of progress and has a contract liability of $200 at the end of
the first year.
— Scenario 1 would be accounted for as a modification. The modification
  would be accounted for on a prospective basis and ABC would not reverse
  the contract liability. ABC would recognize $200 over each of the remaining
  four years (($600 additional consideration + $200 contract liability) / 4).
— Scenario 2 would require accounting for the termination of the original
  contract and the new contract separately. ABC would account for the
  termination of the original contract by recognizing the contract liability into
  revenue and then accounting for the new contract separately by recognizing
  the $600 over the four years of service. ABC would recognize a $350 ($200




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 638
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




      reversal plus $150 of the new contract) in the first year of the new contract
      and $150 in the last three years.
To evaluate whether the substance of a new contract is a change in scope or
price of a terminated contract, we believe the contract combination guidance in
Step 1 needs to be evaluated to determine if the new and terminated contract
are in substance a single modified contract. We believe this is appropriate
because the change in price and scope of the terminated contract (i.e. the
termination) occurs at or near the same time the new contract is entered into.
That is, we believe the date the terms of one contract change and the date the
new contract is entered into are relevant to the contract combination guidance
rather than the date the terminated contract was originally entered into. After
that determination, the modification guidance is applied to determine the
appropriate accounting.
Similarly, we believe that when a contract is modified (including terminations)
an entity needs to consider the contract combination guidance to determine
whether other contracts entered into at or near the same time as the
modification should be combined with the modification. This ensures that the
modification is accounted for according to its substance and not its form.
The contract combination guidance requires that contracts entered into at or
near the same time with the customer should be combined when:
— the contracts are negotiated as a package with a single commercial
  objective;
— the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the price
  or performance of the other contract; or
— the goods or services promised in the contracts (or some goods or services
  promised in each of the contracts) are a single performance obligation
  (see Chapter B – Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer;
  Combining contracts). [606-10-25-9]



                  Question G40
                  Is the exercise of a customer option for additional
                  goods or services (including a renewal) that is
                  considered a marketing offer, and not a material
                  right, a modification of the existing contract?
Interpretive response: No. At the March 2015 TRG meeting, the TRG generally
agreed that an entity could account for the exercise of an option that grants the
customer a material right either:
— as a continuation of the current contract by allocating the additional
  consideration to the goods or services underlying the option; or
— as a contract modification.
A customer option that is considered a marketing offer is not the same as one
that provides the customer with a material right; and therefore, we do not view
the TRG discussion as analogous to this circumstance. In general, we believe a
customer option that is a marketing offer (i.e. does not provide the customer




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 639
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




with a material right) is not a part of the original contract and should be treated
as a new contract upon exercising the option.
Further, even if the option price is lower than the exercise date stand-alone
selling price (i.e. the stand-alone selling price of the optional good or service has
increased since the option was granted), the entity would not adjust the
accounting for the original contract (i.e. account for the option exercise as a
modification of the original contract) or another existing contract. The exercise
of the option would still constitute a new contract. Because the option price at
the time of grant was commensurate with stand-alone selling price, even if the
stand-alone selling price of the good or service has increased from when the
option was granted, the exercise of the previously negotiated option that did
not convey a material right to the customer – i.e. the purchase of the optional
good or service subject to terms agreed previously – is not a modification
changing the scope or the price of the original contract or another
existing contract.



                  Question G50
                  When does a contract claim result in a contract
                  modification?

Interpretive response: Contract claims are evaluated using the guidance on
contract modifications. A contract claim is typically described as an amount in
excess of the agreed contract price that a contractor seeks to collect from
customers or other parties. Claims may arise from customer-caused delays,
errors in specifications or design, contract terminations, change orders that are
in dispute or unapproved on both scope and price, or other causes of
unanticipated additional costs.
Assessing whether a claim gives rise to a contract modification may require a
detailed understanding of the entity’s legal position, which may require
third-party advice, even when a master services agreement or other governing
document prescribes the claim resolution process under the contract.
The assessment may be more straightforward if an objective framework for
resolution exists – e.g. if the contract includes a defined list of cost overruns
that will be eligible for reimbursement and a price list or rate schedule.
Conversely, the mere presence of a resolution framework – e.g. a requirement
to enter into binding arbitration instead of litigation – will generally not negate an
entity’s need to obtain legal advice to determine whether its claim is
enforceable. If enforceable rights do not exist for a contract claim, then a
contract modification has not occurred and no additional contract revenue is
recognized until either approval or legal enforceability is established.
An entity’s accounting for any costs incurred before approval of a contract
modification will depend on the nature of the costs. In some circumstances,
those costs will be expensed as they are incurred. In other circumstances, an
entity will need to consider whether the expectation of costs without a
corresponding increase in the transaction price requires the recognition of an
onerous contract provision. Or, a contract modification may be considered a
specifically anticipated contract such that the costs incurred before approval of




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 640
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




the contract modification – i.e. pre-contract costs – would be capitalized if the
fulfillment cost criteria in paragraph 340-40-25-5 are met, which may be the
case if the costs relate to fulfilling goods or services that are distinct from those
in the original contract.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP construction- and production-type ‘contract accounting’,
which applied to software licensing arrangements that included the significant
production, modification or customization of software and other circumstances
where services were essential to the functionality of the licensed software, a
claim was included in contract revenues if it was probable that the claim would
result in additional contract revenue that could be reliably estimated. This
requirement was satisfied when all of the following conditions existed:
a. the contract or other evidence provided a legal basis for the claim; or a legal
   opinion had been obtained;
b. additional costs were caused by circumstances that were unforeseen at the
   contract date and were not the result of deficiencies in the contractor's
   performance;
c. costs associated with the claim were identifiable or otherwise
   determinable; and
d. the evidence supporting the claim was objective and verifiable.
In contrast, outside of ‘contract accounting’ most entities generally did not
account for a claim as a contract modification before they had persuasive
evidence of an arrangement for the modified contract and the resulting fees
were fixed or determinable.
The contract modification guidance in Topic 606 requires an entity to assess
whether the modification creates new, or changes, enforceable rights and
obligations. Similar to legacy US GAAP, this assessment includes an evaluation
of the collectibility of the consideration for an unpriced change order or claim.
However, a number of additional criteria included in Topic 606 also need to be
considered when evaluating whether a contract modification exists. These
criteria may or may not have been incorporated into an entity’s evaluation of the
probability of recovery under legacy US GAAP, and may therefore change the
timing of revenue associated with contract modifications. For example, when
determining whether and when to recognize revenue from contract claims, an
entity should consider whether there are differences between having a legal
basis for a claim and the modification being legally enforceable. Enforceability
would typically suggest that there needs to be a basis to conclude that the
entity would prevail in legal proceedings rather than just having a legal basis for
the claim itself.
Consistent with the comparison to legacy US GAAP in Question G20,
recognition of claims-related revenue may be accelerated as compared to
legacy US GAAP for arrangements that were not subject to the long-term
construction- and production-type contract guidance because (1) the Topic 606
requirements around enforceability do not require approval of a change to
follow the entity’s customary business practice for persuasive evidence of an



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 641
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




arrangement and (2) the fees for a change order are not precluded from
recognition before they are fixed or determinable based on the variable
consideration guidance in Topic 606 – see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the
transaction price.



Accounting for contract modifications
Overview


                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Contract Modifications
25-12 An entity shall account for a contract modification as a separate contract
if both of the following conditions are present:
a. The scope of the contract increases because of the addition of promised
   goods or services that are distinct (in accordance with paragraphs 606-10-
   25-18 through 25-22).
b. The price of the contract increases by an amount of consideration that
   reflects the entity’s standalone selling prices of the additional promised
   goods or services and any appropriate adjustments to that price to reflect
   the circumstances of the particular contract. For example, an entity may
   adjust the standalone selling price of an additional good or service for a
   discount that the customer receives, because it is not necessary for the
   entity to incur the selling-related costs that it would incur when selling a
   similar good or service to a new customer.
25-13 If a contract modification is not accounted for as a separate contract in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-12, an entity shall account for the
promised goods or services not yet transferred at the date of the contract
modification (that is, the remaining promised goods or services) in whichever
of the following ways is applicable:
a.     An entity shall account for the contract modification as if it were a
       termination of the existing contract, and the creation of a new contract, if
       the remaining goods or services are distinct from the goods or services
       transferred on or before the date of the contract modification. The amount
       of consideration to be allocated to the remaining performance obligations
       (or to the remaining distinct goods or services in a single performance
       obligation identified in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-14(b)) is the
       sum of:
       1. The consideration promised by the customer (including amounts
          already received from the customer) that was included in the estimate
          of the transaction price and that had not been recognized as revenue
          and
       2. The consideration promised as part of the contract modification.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 642
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




b. An entity shall account for the contract modification as if it were a part of
   the existing contract if the remaining goods or services are not distinct and,
   therefore, form part of a single performance obligation that is partially
   satisfied at the date of the contract modification. The effect that the
   contract modification has on the transaction price, and on the entity’s
   measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance
   obligation, is recognized as an adjustment to revenue (either as an increase
   in or a reduction of revenue) at the date of the contract modification (that
   is, the adjustment to revenue is made on a cumulative catch-up basis).
c. If the remaining goods or services are a combination of items (a) and (b),
   then the entity shall account for the effects of the modification on the
   unsatisfied (including partially unsatisfied) performance obligations in the
   modified contract in a manner that is consistent with the objectives of this
   paragraph.


Having determined that a contract has been modified, an entity then
determines the appropriate accounting for the modification. The Boards
developed different approaches to account for different types of modifications
with an overall objective to faithfully depict the rights and obligations arising
from a modified contract. Certain contract modifications are treated as separate
contracts, and others are accounted for as part of the existing contract.
Topic 606 requires an entity to account for modifications on a prospective basis
(when the additional goods or services are distinct), on a cumulative catch-up
basis (when the additional goods or services are not distinct), or as a
combination of the two approaches (i.e. both distinct and non-distinct goods or
services are added to the contract).
A contract modification is treated as a separate contract (prospective treatment)
if the modification results in:
— a promise to deliver additional goods or services that are distinct; and
— an increase in the price of the contract by an amount of consideration that
  reflects the entity’s stand-alone selling price of those goods or services
  adjusted to reflect the circumstances of the contract.
When a contract modification meets the above criteria, there is no economic
difference between an entity entering into a separate contract for additional
goods or services or modifying an existing contract. That is because the stand-
alone selling price is the price at which an entity would sell a good or service
separately to a customer and there would be no discount to allocate between
the two contracts. Therefore, the original contract continues to be accounted
for as it was before the modification and the modification is treated as a new
contract to which Topic 606 is applied.
If the modification does not result in the creation of a separate contract, then
the entity’s accounting for the modification is based on whether the remaining
goods or services under the modified contract are distinct from those goods or
services transferred to the customer before the modification.
If the remaining goods or services are distinct (but the pricing of the
modification is not commensurate with the stand-alone selling price of those
goods or services after reflecting the circumstances of the contract), then the
entity accounts for the modification prospectively. This is because accounting
for those modifications on a cumulative catch-up basis could be complex and



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 643
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




may not necessarily faithfully depict the economics of a modification because
the modification is negotiated after the original contract and is based on new
facts and circumstances. This approach avoids opening up the accounting for
previously satisfied performance obligations and reversals to previously
recognized amounts. [ASU 2014-09.BC78]
When the remaining goods or services are distinct, the entity accounts for the
modification as if it were a termination of the existing contract and the creation
of a new contract. In this case, the entity does not reallocate the change in the
transaction price to performance obligations that are completely or partially
satisfied on or before the date of the contract modification. Instead, the amount
of consideration allocated to the remaining performance obligations is equal to:
— the consideration included in the estimate of the transaction price of the
  original contract that has not been recognized as revenue (which therefore
  excludes the amount of any contract asset existing at the modification date
  – see Question G100); plus or minus
— the increase or decrease in the consideration promised by the contract
  modification.
If the modification does not add distinct goods or services, then the entity
accounts for it on a combined basis with the original contract, as if the
additional goods or services were part of the initial contract – i.e. a cumulative
catch-up adjustment. The modification is recognized as either an increase in, or
reduction of, revenue at the date of the modification.
The key decision points to consider when determining whether a contract
modification should be accounted for as part of the original contract or a
separate contract are illustrated in the flow chart below.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 644
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                           Is the contract modification                                     Do not account for
                                    approved?                                              contract modification
                             [606-10-25-10 – 25-11]                             No            until approved


                                                   Yes

                      Does the modification add distinct
                      goods or services that are priced
                                                                                              Account for as
                       commensurate with their stand-
                                                                                             separate contract
                      alone selling prices (as adjusted                        Yes             (prospective)
                             for contract specific
                       circumstances)? [606-10-25-12]

                                                   No
                                                                                              Account for as
                       Are remaining goods or services                                    termination of existing
                          distinct from those already                                    contract and creation of
                                  transferred?                                 Yes
                                                                                               new contract
                                [606-10-25-13]                                                (perspective)
                                                                                            [606-10-25-13(a)]


                           No                              Yes & No


                                                     Account for as termination
    Account for as part of the
                                                      of existing contract and
        original contract
                                                      creation of new contract
     (cumulative catch-up)
                                                           (combination)
       [606-10-25-13(b)]
                                                         [606-10-25-13(c)]


Modifications to distinct goods or services in a series are
accounted for prospectively
Identifying a performance obligation as a series of distinct service periods (e.g.
SaaS, PCS and hosting services performance obligations will generally be
considered a series of distinct SaaS, PCS or hosting service periods – see
Chapter C – Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract) can
significantly affect the accounting for contract modifications. The Boards
observed that modifications to a single performance obligation made up of a
series of distinct goods or services should be accounted for prospectively.
When a contract modification does not result in a separate contract, entities are
required to evaluate whether the remaining goods or services are distinct even
if those distinct goods or services are part of a single performance obligation.
When the remaining goods or services are a part of a single performance
obligation that is considered a series of distinct goods or services, the
remaining items in that performance obligation will be considered distinct.
[ASU 2014-09.BC79]

A distinct software license is not a series of, for example, distinct periods of
access to that software. Rather a distinct software license is a single good
transferred at a point in time.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 645
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




The following table summarizes the contract modifications model under
Topic 606; the questions that follow in this section provide additional detail and
examples.

             Account for the contract modification as …

             … a separate contract                … a termination of an      … part of the original
                                                  existing contract and      contract
                                                  creation of a new contract
             Addition of one or more              Addition of one or more                   Addition of one or more
             distinct goods or services           distinct goods or services                goods or services that
             (e.g. an additional                  at a price that is                        are not distinct from (i.e.
             software license and                 discounted from stand-                    becomes part of) a
             related PCS that are                 alone selling price and                   performance obligation
             distinct from existing               that discount does not                    in the original contract
             software licenses                    result from appropriate                   (e.g. incorporating an
             transferred to the                   contract-specific                         additional customization
             customer and PCS being               adjustments; all                          into a software
             provided) at a price that            remaining services                        customization project)



 Example 1
             reflects either (1) the              provided under the
             stand-alone selling price            original contract are also
             for that (those) additional          distinct – see
             good(s) or service(s) or (2)         Question G100
             a discount from stand-
             alone selling price
             resulting from
             adjustments that
             appropriately reflect the
             circumstances of the
             particular contract – see
             Questions G70 and G90
             and Illustrative
             Example G1

             Account for the contract modification as …

             … a separate contract                … a termination of an      … part of the original
                                                  existing contract and      contract
                                                  creation of a new contract
                                                  Modification of the                       Modification of the
                                                  contract price, with no                   contract price, with no
                                                  change in the contracted                  change in the contracted
                                                  goods or services and the                 goods or services and
                                                  remaining goods and                       the remaining goods and


 Example 2
                                                  services are distinct from                services are not distinct
                                                  those already delivered                   from those already
                                                  (e.g. a price reduction in                delivered (e.g. a change
                                                  the monthly fees for the                  in the price of a software
                                                  remaining months of a                     customization contract) –
                                                  long-term SaaS or hosting                 see Question G120
                                                  services contract) – see
                                                  Question G120




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 646
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




             Account for the contract modification as …

             … a separate contract                … a termination of an      …combination of
                                                  existing contract and      methods
                                                  creation of a new contract
                                                  Decreasing the goods or                   Adding one or more
                                                  services to be provided                   distinct goods or
                                                  under the contract (e.g.                  services and changing
                                                  shortening a SaaS, PCS or                 the scope of a single
                                                  hosting services term)                    performance obligation
                                                  and the remaining goods                   in the original contract
                                                  or services are distinct                  (e.g. changing the
                                                  from those already                        specifications for a
                                                  provided (e.g. a service                  series of software
                                                  obligation constitutes a                  customizations or the


 Example 3
                                                  series of distinct service                scope of a consulting
                                                  periods such that the                     report to be issued) –
                                                  remaining service periods                 see Question G150
                                                  are distinct from the
                                                  services provided before
                                                  the modification) – see
                                                  Question G110
                                                  A scope decrease
                                                  modification will never be
                                                  accounted for as a
                                                  separate contract (i.e. in
                                                  accordance with
                                                  paragraph 606-10-25-12)




                   Illustrative example G1
                   Contract modification that is a separate contract
ABC Corp. sells Customer a three-year license to software Product A along with
technical support and rights to unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements (collectively, PCS – accounted for as a single performance
obligation, see Question C150) beginning on January 1, 20X6. The consideration
for the software license is $300,000. Consideration for the PCS over the license
term is $162,000. ABC concludes that the PCS and the Product A license are
priced commensurate with their stand-alone selling prices.
The terms of the license permit Customer to have 10 named users during the
three-year license term. ABC makes available to Customer a copy of the
software, and Customer’s rights to use the software commence on January 1,
20X6.
ABC concludes that the software license and the PCS are distinct from each
other. Consequently, ABC concludes that there are two performance
obligations in this contract: the software license and PCS.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 647
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




After the entity transfers control of the license to the customer on January 1,
20X6, there are no additional license rights to be transferred – e.g. there are no
remaining promises for ABC to transfer additional rights to use the software in
other geographies or for additional uses, or to grant additional named users. In
other words, the customer controls all of the rights to use ABC’s software that
it will ever control under the contract as of that date.
On January 1, 20X7, ABC and Customer approve a contract modification. Under
the modification Customer is permitted 20 named users (an increase from the
original 10 named users permitted as of January 1, 20X6) for an additional fee of
$200,000 for the remainder of the two-year contract term. The modification also
includes additional PCS for the added users for an additional fee of $72,000.
The additional named user rights represent an additional license (i.e. an
additional good) ABC promises to transfer to Customer, while the incremental
PCS represents an additional service ABC will provide.
ABC concludes that the additional 10-named user license to Product A and the
incremental PCS, as a bundle, are distinct from (1) the original Product A license
transferred on January 1, 20X6; (2) the PCS provided to Customer before the
contract modification related to the original license; and (3) the remaining
original license PCS yet to be provided under the original contract (i.e. two
remaining years of such services) and therefore the criterion in paragraph 606-
10-25-12(a) is met.
ABC further concludes that the additional consideration promised for the added
license and incremental PCS reflects the stand-alone selling prices for those
items and any appropriate adjustments to those stand-alone selling prices for
the circumstances of this contract and therefore the criterion in paragraph 606-
10-25-12(b) is met. In reaching this conclusion, ABC notes that the incremental
consideration of $272,000 for the two-year license and two years of PCS is
directly proportional to the $462,000 price for the original three-year license and
three years of PCS – i.e. the license fee for the additional license is two-thirds
of the price paid for the three-year original license that granted the same rights
and the PCS fees in both cases are 18% of the license fee per year.
Question G90 discusses considerations for circumstances where a software
license or a software license/PCS bundle has a highly variable or uncertain
stand-alone selling price.
Because both criteria in paragraph 606-10-25-12 are met, ABC accounts for the
modification granting the additional license and providing incremental PCS as a
separate contract – i.e. separate from the original contract. Therefore, ABC’s
accounting for the original contract is unaffected by the modification.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 648
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Question G60
                  When evaluating whether contract consideration
                  for additional, distinct goods or services reflects the
                  stand-alone selling price of those goods or services,
                  should an entity use the stand-alone selling price at
                  the modification date or at the original contract’s
                  inception?
Interpretive response: At the time of the modification. The Basis for
Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC77) states that the objective of determining
whether a contract modification should be accounted for as a separate contract
is to determine whether there would be no economic difference between
amending the current contract or entering into a new contract. As a result, the
relevant stand-alone selling price is the price at the modification date, as if the
modification were a new contract between the entity and a similarly situated
customer with whom the entity does not have an existing contract.
Below is an example from Topic 606 that illustrates when the evaluation is made:


                     Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Example 5 — Modification of a Contract for Goods
55-111 An entity promises to sell 120 products to a customer for $12,000
($100 per product). The products are transferred to the customer over a
six-month period. The entity transfers control of each product at a point in time.
After the entity has transferred control of 60 products to the customer, the
contract is modified to require the delivery of an additional 30 products (a total
of 150 identical products) to the customer. The additional 30 products were not
included in the initial contract.
• • • > Case A — Additional Products for a Price That Reflects the Standalone
Selling Price
55-112 When the contract is modified, the price of the contract modification for
the additional 30 products is an additional $2,850 or $95 per product. The
pricing for the additional products reflects the standalone selling price of the
products at the time of the contract modification, and the additional products
are distinct (in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-19) from the original
products.
55-113 In accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-12, the contract modification
for the additional 30 products is, in effect, a new and separate contract for
future products that does not affect the accounting for the existing contract.
The entity recognizes revenue of $100 per product for the 120 products in the
original contract and $95 per product for the 30 products in the new contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 649
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Question G70
                  What evidence is required to substantiate that a
                  deviation from stand-alone selling price reflects an
                  ‘appropriate adjustment’ for the circumstances of a
                  particular contract?
Interpretive response: Consider a scenario in which an entity enters into a
contract with a customer for a distinct good or service before completing a
previously contracted service, and the original contract and the new contract are
not combined based on the guidance in paragraph 606-10-25-9 (see Chapter B –
Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer). For example, assume an entity
and a customer contract for a renewal of their existing three-year SaaS
arrangement with six-nine months remaining of the original three-year SaaS
term. Further consider that the price for the three-year renewal is below the
pricing in the original contract and that the three-year renewal SaaS is distinct
from the original three-year SaaS. This type of contract could be structured as
an amendment to an existing contract or as a separate contract.
Because, in this scenario, the new contract is for a distinct good or service (in
the example, distinct SaaS), the determination about whether the new contract
is a modification of the original contract or, instead, a separate contract rests on
(1) whether the additional consideration in the new contract reflects the stand-
alone selling price of the distinct good or service and (2) if not, whether the
deviation from stand-alone selling price reflects adjustments appropriate to the
circumstances of the contract.
Step 1: Determine the appropriate stand-alone selling price
The stand-alone selling price for a good or service may differ for different
classes of customer (e.g. new customers versus renewing customers,
customers with licenses to many of the entity’s products or services versus
those with only a few or one). Therefore, it is important, when evaluating
whether the additional consideration in a new contract reflects stand-alone
selling price for the additional goods or services, to determine the appropriate
stand-alone selling price for those goods or services. If an entity is frequently
concluding that its sales to existing customers are below stand-alone selling
price, the entity should first consider whether existing customers are a different
class of customer than new customers such that the stand-alone selling prices
of its goods or services are different for that class of customer.
The price at which an entity ‘would sell a promised good or service separately
to a [renewal or existing] customer’ may be lower than the price at which an
entity ‘would sell a promised good or service separately to a [new] customer’
because, as indicated in paragraph 606-10-25-12(b), ‘it is not necessary for the
entity to incur the selling-related costs that it would incur when selling a similar
good or service to a new customer.’ While the absence of, or lower, selling
costs (e.g. the entity may pay proportionally lower sales commissions on
renewal contracts) may frequently be a reason for a lower renewal or existing
customer stand-alone selling price, other costs also may be significantly lower
(or not incurred at all) for renewal or existing customers. For example, SaaS
providers may incur significant set-up costs for a new customer that it does not
recover through set-up or implementation services fees. The same may be true




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 650
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




for software licensing entities that provide hosting services. It also may be the
case that a new customer requires significantly more technical support from the
entity to acclimate to the new SaaS or software solution during an initial term
than it will in renewal periods.
In addition to lower costs the entity may incur to obtain or fulfill a contract with
an existing customer, a customer may migrate to a different class of customer
through the modification. For example, a customer with an existing license
capacity of 1,000 MIPS may add an additional 1,000 MIPS capacity (along with
incremental PCS). The stand-alone selling price of a 1,000 MIPS license to a
customer that will now be a 2,000 MIPS capacity customer (including related
PCS) may be lower than the stand-alone selling price of a 1,000 MIPS license to
a new customer.
Step 2: Determine if a deviation from stand-alone selling price is
‘appropriate’ to the circumstances of the particular contract
In certain circumstances, an entity may agree to sell an additional good or
service to a customer at a price below the stand-alone selling price for those
additional goods or services to that class of customer. In principle, we believe
that in order for a deviation from the stand-alone selling price to be an
adjustment ‘appropriate’ to the circumstances of the particular contract (and
therefore, not result in a modification to the original contract), it must result
from a negotiation between the entity and the customer that is separate from
the original contract and unrelated to the original contract. That is, the terms
and conditions of the new contract, including the adjustment from stand-alone
selling price, must be unrelated to the entity’s performance under, contract
disputes arising from, or the pricing or payment terms of the original contract.
This is consistent with the objective of determining whether a contract
modification should be accounted for as a separate contract, expressed in the
Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC77), which is to determine when
there is no substantive economic difference between modifying the existing
contract and entering into a separate contract.
Judgment will frequently be required in evaluating whether a deviation from
stand-alone selling price reflects an ‘appropriate adjustment’ based on particular
contract circumstances, or instead, suggests that the new contract (however
written – i.e. as an amendment, addendum or as a new contract) is modifying
the terms and conditions of an existing contract. Specific facts and
circumstances will need to be considered.
Assuming the new contract and the original contract are not combined in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-9, we believe the following are factors
that would provide relevant evidence about whether the new contract
negotiation between the entity and the customer, resulting in the adjustment to
(i.e. the discount from) the stand-alone selling price, is separate from the
original contract (not exhaustive):
— Competitive negotiation process. If the customer was actively seeking
  bids from, or was being solicited by, other vendors for the same or similar
  goods or services, that may support a view that the deviation from stand-
  alone selling price in the new contract was the result of a substantive
  negotiation unrelated to the original contract, and the entity had a valid
  business reason unrelated to the prior contract for offering the discounted
  price. Additional evidence that suitable alternatives are being offered by



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 651
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




      other vendors at prices broadly consistent with the price in the new
      contract would support that the pricing in the new contract was the result
      of a substantive negotiation separate from any prior or existing contract.
— Evidence of performance issues or payment disputes. There may have
  been performance issues on the part of the entity (e.g. poor service or
  significant operating down-time) or customer payment disputes (e.g. the
  customer disputing amounts invoiced for services provided under the
  original contract, including disputes related to the measurement of variable
  consideration such as whether a performance bonus was or was not
  earned or service level penalties were or were not incurred) arising from the
  original contract. Such performance issues or payment disputes would
  generally create a presumption that at least some portion of the deviation
  from stand-alone selling price is related to those performance issues or
  payment disputes, affecting the accounting for the original contract (see
  Question G80). Conversely, the absence of any such issues would support,
  though would generally not be determinative, that the negotiation between
  the entity and the customer that resulted in additional consideration below
  the stand-alone selling prices of the additional goods or services is separate
  from the original contract.
— History of price or other concessions. A history of granting concessions
  to its customers would significantly elevate the burden of proof on an entity
  to substantiate that selling a distinct good or service at a price below its
  stand-alone selling price was for a valid business reason unconnected to
  the original contract. In such cases, the burden of evidence would increase
  to demonstrate that the discount from stand-alone selling price was for a
  business reason unrelated to the original contract and substantiate that the
  discount was proportional to the reason.
— Changes to the terms of the original contract. If the new contract
  changes the price, scope or billing terms for the remaining goods or
  services in the original contract, that would typically indicate the new
  contract and the original contract were not separately negotiated. Rather,
  the new contract’s terms were agreed to in contemplation of the changes
  to the original contract. In contrast, no changes to the original contract
  should not be viewed as determinative that the original contract has not
  been modified; such a conclusion will generally also rely on consideration of
  other factors.
— Set-up or other costs. As outlined earlier in this question, the absence of, or
  lower, costs (e.g. to obtain or fulfill the contract) may suggest a reason for a
  lower stand-alone selling price for renewal or existing customers. However,
  contract-specific cost considerations may also exist that resulted in the entity
  selling an additional good or service at a discount from the stand-alone selling
  price for that class of customer. For example, if the customer has a
  sophisticated IT department that is able to perform necessary SaaS set-up
  activities rather than the entity’s personnel, who typically undertake those
  activities for similar customers, that may justify a correspondingly lower
  contract price for the SaaS.
The following additional factors may also provide corroborative evidence that
the new contract was negotiated without consideration to the original contract,
depending on the facts and circumstances:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 652
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




— Period of time between original and new contract inception. The
  greater the period of time between original and new contract inception
  and/or between the payment for the goods or services provided under the
  original contract and new contract inception, the more likely it may be that
  the terms and conditions of the new contract were negotiated separate
  from, and not affected by, the original contract.
— Other observable prices. The stand-alone selling price of the good or
  service may be based on a narrow range of observable prices. However,
  the entity may have a substantive number of stand-alone sales that are
  outside of that narrow range. When the price for the distinct good or
  service in the new contract is consistent with prices established in
  separately negotiated contracts, even if those prices are outside of the
  range used to establish stand-alone selling price, that may support that a
  discount from stand-alone selling price is unrelated to the original contract.
  That is, those other sales substantiate that the entity has sold the good or
  service at a similar price to other customers separate from prior contracts.
— Customary business practices. If the entity’s process for negotiating and
  entering into the new contract with the customer is consistent with its
  customary business practice for entering into contracts with new
  customers (e.g. similar negotiation timeline, similar contract pricing
  guidelines for the entity’s salespeople), that may be supportive of the new
  contract negotiation being unrelated to the original contract. For example,
  the fact that a SaaS provider is negotiating a renewal a few months before
  the end of the current contract term may be customary practice for the
  entity because customers need time to migrate to another solution if
  acceptable renewal terms cannot be agreed. The valid business reason for
  negotiating the renewal before the current term is complete supports that
  the timing of the negotiation is not indicative of any intent to modify the
  terms of the current contract.



                  Example G70.1
                  SaaS arrangement renewal accounted for as a
                  separate contract
SaaS Company G enters into a contract with Customer to provide its SaaS for
3 years for a fee of $1,500 per month. The SaaS is a single performance
obligation comprised of a series of distinct services. The contract does not
include stated renewal options. With 6 months remaining in the contract,
Company G and Customer enter into a new contract that extends the service
for an additional three years at $1,300 per month. $1,300 is below the range
Company G has established as the stand-alone selling price for the SaaS for this
class of customer (i.e. similar customers entering into contract renewals). The
remaining term of the original contract remains unchanged, and the entity will
continue to charge $1,500 per month for the remaining six months.
In evaluating whether the new contract is a separate contract or a modification
of the original contract, Company G first concludes that the new contract and
the original contract would not be combined under paragraph 606-10-25-9




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 653
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




because they were not entered into at or near the same time (executed
approximately 2.5 years apart).
Next, Company G concludes that the additional three-year SaaS is distinct from
the original three-year SaaS obligation – i.e. the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-
12(a) is met. Customer can clearly benefit from each SaaS period separately;
Company G can provide the SaaS for any period of time independent from
providing it for any other period of time; and there is no integration,
customization or modification of the SaaS services in one period with or by
those provided in another period.
Lastly, Company G evaluates whether the discount from the stand-alone selling
price for this class of customer represents an adjustment from stand-alone
selling price that is unrelated to the original contract – i.e. the criterion in
paragraph 606-10-25-12(b) is met. Company G’s conclusion that the criterion in
paragraph 606-10-25-12(b) is met is based on all of the following.
— While Company G is not aware of Customer soliciting bids from other SaaS
  or on-premise software providers, Company G understands Customer to be
  ‘price-sensitive’ and there are other readily available SaaS and on-premise
  solutions Customer could implement, including new entrants to the market
  since the original contract was executed, such that Company G operates in
  a competitive market. Company G has as a business objective to retain or
  enhance its market share even as the market becomes more competitive.
— Company G has no history of granting price or other concessions to its
  customers, and there have not been any significant service issues or
  payment disputes between Company G and Customer during the current
  contract term. For example, Customer has timely paid its invoices and there
  have not been disputes about service levels – i.e. Customer has not
  asserted that service level penalties have been incurred. Consequently,
  there is no evidence the discount from stand-alone selling price in the
  renewal contract is compensating the customer for past service issues/poor
  performance or represents a concession to settle an existing or prior
  payment dispute.
— During the initial three-year term, Customer has developed an internal, first-
  tier support capacity such that Customer’s support needs from Company G
  have been, and are expected to remain, less than those of similar
  customers. Company G’s support logs substantiate this and Company G
  considered this when deciding whether to accept the pricing Customer
  wanted for the renewal period.
— There are no changes to terms or conditions of the original contract
  resulting from the renewal contract (e.g. no changes to the scope of
  services that will be provided during the remainder of the original term, the
  payment terms or payment amounts).
— The negotiation and execution timeframe for the renewal contract, while
  occurring before the existing three-year SaaS period expires is for a valid
  business reason, which is that customers must have time to change
  solutions if the two parties cannot come to terms for a renewal. Therefore,
  the timing of the new contract negotiations occurring before the end of the
  existing contract period does not alone imply those negotiations included
  potential modifications to the remainder of the original contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 654
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




Based on the facts and circumstances in this case, Company G concludes that
the renewal contract with Customer is a separate contract (as described in
paragraph 606-10-25-12), rather than a modification of the original contract.
Consequently, the accounting for the original contract is not affected by
the renewal.



                   Question G75
                   How should an entity account for a blend-and-
                   extend modification?
Interpretive response: It depends. Entities sometimes enter into contract
modifications whereby the period of a contract is extended in exchange for a
new blended price throughout the remaining term. For example, after one year
of a three-year contract priced at $100 per year, an entity and customer agree to
extend the contract for two years and change the price for the remaining four
years (original two remaining, plus two added) to $50.
In a typical blend-and-extend modification, the extension adds distinct goods or
services (e.g. additional transactions to process or time increments that
constitute a series). Therefore the modification would be accounted for as
either a separate contract or the termination of an existing contract and the
creation of a new contract (see Chapter G – Contract modifications; Accounting
for contract modifications) depending on the price of distinct additional goods or
services (assuming that a concession related to past performance is not
included in the modification).
However, if the extension adds goods or services that are not distinct, an entity
accounts for a contract modification with either a cumulative catch-up
adjustment or by using a combination of the methods of modification
accounting (see Chapter G – Contract modifications; Accounting for contract
modifications).
Is the price of the added goods commensurate with stand-alone selling
price?
To determine whether the modification should be accounted for as a separate
contract, an entity evaluates whether the price of the additional distinct goods
or services is commensurate with their stand-alone selling price (as adjusted for
contract-specific circumstances). If the price of the additional distinct goods or
services is not commensurate with stand-alone selling price, the modification is
accounted for as a termination of the existing contract and creation of a new
contract. If the price is commensurate, the modification is a separate contract.
The typical issue in a blend-and-extend modification is whether the stand-alone
selling price should be compared to the overall increase in the contract value or
the blended contractual cash selling price of the added goods or services.
When the overall price increase is not commensurate with the stand-alone
selling price of the additional goods or services, the modification should be
accounted for as a termination of an existing contract and the creation of a new
contract. That is because neither the overall price nor the blended stated price
would be commensurate with the stand-alone selling price.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 655
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




The guidance is less clear when the overall increase in contract value is
commensurate with the stand-alone selling price of the additional distinct goods
or services, but the blended contractual cash selling price is not. In these cases,
we believe the following approaches are acceptable.
Approach 1: Added services treated as a separate contract
Under this approach, an entity compares the overall contract price increase to
the stand-alone selling price. This approach is based on a narrow reading of the
condition in paragraph 606-10-25-12(b), which states that the “price of the
contract increases by an amount of consideration that reflects the entity’s
stand-alone selling prices of the additional promised goods or services …”
Under this approach, when the price of the entire contract increases in an
amount that is consistent with the stand-alone selling price for the additional
goods or services, the modification is treated as a separate contract. The entity
uses the stand-alone selling price to account for the added goods or services,
and the original contract price to account for the remaining items in the original
contract. As a consequence, for accounting purposes the original contract
remains unchanged even though the pricing in the agreement was modified.
Approach 2: Termination of existing contract and creation of a new
contract
Under this approach, an entity compares the stated contract price of the
additional goods or services to their stand-alone selling price. This approach is
based on the basis for conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC77), which states a
modification is accounted for as a separate contract when the “pricing for those
goods or services reflects their stand-alone selling price.” See Chapter G –
Contract modifications; Accounting for contract modifications for a discussion of
modifications accounted for as the termination of an existing contract and
creation of a new contract.
Example G75.1 illustrates a blend-and-extend modification under the two
approaches.



                  Example G75.1
                  Blend-and-extend contract modification
SaaS Co enters into a non-cancellable four-year contract with Customer to
deliver 1 terabyte of online storage capacity per year for $60 per terabyte.
At the beginning of Year 3 (two years remaining in the contract), SaaS Co and
Customer agree to a blend-and-extend modification to add two additional years.
The modification increases the remaining term to four years.
Market prices have declined since inception of the original contract and the
market price at the modification date is $50/terabyte. The overall contract price
is increased based on the then-current market price for the added services
($100 for the two additional years at $50/terabyte) and blended with the pricing
for the remaining term of the original contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                      656
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




As a result, the modified contract has four years remaining, priced at
$55/terabyte:
                             (($60/terabyte × 2) + ($50/terabyte × 2)) / 4.
SaaS Co concluded that the original contract has a single performance
obligation satisfied over time that is a series of distinct services and that the
additional services are therefore distinct. As of the modification date, SaaS Co
had recognized $120 of revenue and there were no contract assets or liabilities.
Because the overall price increased by the market price (i.e. stand-alone selling
price) but the blended contractual price is not commensurate with stand-alone
selling price, SaaS Co could account for the modification under either of the
approaches described above in Question G75.
Approach 1: Added services treated as a separate contract
SaaS Co concludes that the overall contract price increases by the market
price ($100), which is commensurate with the stand-alone selling price for the
two additional terabytes. Therefore, SaaS Co accounts for the additional
services as a separate contract.

                                                  Year 3                 Year 4                 Year 5                 Year 6
 Revenue remaining on
 original contract                                    $60                      $60                       -                       -
 Revenue on new
 contract                                                  -                       -                 $50                    $50
 Cash received                                          55                      55                    55                        55
 End-of-year contract
 asset/(liability)                                    $ 5                      $10                   $ 5                    $ 0

Approach 2: Termination of existing contract and creation of a new
contract
SaaS Co concludes that the blended contract pricing of $55/terabyte (i.e. the
stated pricing for the additional 2 terabyte) is not commensurate with the stand-
alone selling price of $50/terabyte. Therefore, SaaS Co accounts for the
modification as a termination of the existing contract and a creation of a new
contract.

                                                  Year 3                 Year 4                 Year 5                 Year 6
 Revenue on new
 contract                                             $55                      $55                   $55                    $55
 Cash received                                          55                      55                    55                        55
 End-of-year contract
 asset/(liability)                                    $ 0                      $ 0                   $ 0                    $ 0




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 657
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Question G80
                  When additional goods or services are priced at a
                  discount from stand-alone selling price and the
                  discount relates to past performance issues how
                  should the entity account for that modification?
Interpretive response: Entities will need to evaluate the particular facts and
circumstances to evaluate whether a discount provided in a modification relates
to past performance or is a discount on future services. When an entity has
evidence that a discount in a contract modification relates to the entity’s past
performance, the amounts related to the past performance issues should be
accounted for as a change in the transaction price even if that discount is priced
into the amendment on a prospective basis (see Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate
the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; Changes in
the transaction price). Example 5, Case B in Topic 606 illustrates the accounting
for a modification that adds additional goods or services and negotiates a
discount related to past performance issues.
Example 5, Case B states that the minor defects in the initial 60 products
transferred to the customer were ‘unique’. While not stated explicitly, we
believe this fact suggests there was no expectation of defects at contract
inception that would have suggested there was variable consideration in the
original contract. Further, we believe the ‘unique’ description of the defects is
intended to suggest no defects are expected in the products remaining to be
transferred to the customer after the modification and, therefore, that there is
no variable consideration in the modified contract (i.e. for possible further
concessions for additional defects).
In contrast, if the defects were not ‘unique’ to the 60 products initially
transferred to the customer – i.e. such that there was a reasonable chance at
contract inception that some of the products transferred would be defective –
and the entity had previously provided similar concessions when products were
defective, the entity likely should have concluded that the transaction price of
the original contract included variable consideration. And even if there was no
expectation of defects when the original contract was entered into, or any
expectation of granting a concession in the event there were defects, the
occurrence of the defects in the first 60 products transferred, and the granting
of the $900 credit for those defective products, should raise questions about
whether the transaction price for the modified contract (i.e. for the
remaining 90 products not yet transferred at the modification date) includes
variable consideration.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 658
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

• • > Example 5 — Modification of a Contract for Goods
55-111 An entity promises to sell 120 products to a customer for $12,000
($100 per product). The products are transferred to the customer over a
six-month period. The entity transfers control of each product at a point in time.
After the entity has transferred control of 60 products to the customer, the
contract is modified to require the delivery of an additional 30 products (a total
of 150 identical products) to the customer. The additional 30 products were not
included in the initial contract.
• • • > Case B — Additional Products for a Price That Does Not Reflect the
Standalone Selling Price
55-114 During the process of negotiating the purchase of an additional
30 products, the parties initially agree on a price of $80 per product. However,
the customer discovers that the initial 60 products transferred to the customer
contained minor defects that were unique to those delivered products. The
entity promises a partial credit of $15 per product to compensate the customer
for the poor quality of those products. The entity and the customer agree to
incorporate the credit of $900 ($15 credit × 60 products) into the price that the
entity charges for the additional 30 products. Consequently, the contract
modification specifies that the price of the additional 30 products is $1,500 or
$50 per product. That price comprises the agreed-upon price for the additional
30 products of $2,400, or $80 per product, less the credit of $900.
55-115 At the time of modification, the entity recognizes the $900 as a
reduction of the transaction price and, therefore, as a reduction of revenue for
the initial 60 products transferred. In accounting for the sale of the additional
30 products, the entity determines that the negotiated price of $80 per product
does not reflect the standalone selling price of the additional products.
Consequently, the contract modification does not meet the conditions in
paragraph 606-10-25-12 to be accounted for as a separate contract. Because
the remaining products to be delivered are distinct from those already
transferred, the entity applies the guidance in paragraph 606-10-25-13(a) and
accounts for the modification as a termination of the original contract and the
creation of a new contract.
55-116 Consequently, the amount recognized as revenue for each of the
remaining products is a blended price of $93.33 {[($100 × 60 products not yet
transferred under the original contract) + ($80 × 30 products to be transferred
under the contract modification)] ÷ 90 remaining products}.



                  Example G80.1
                  Contract to purchase additional software licenses at
                  a discount due to bugs
On January 1, 20X7, ABC Corp. transfers 300 three-year term licenses to
software Product K to Reseller at a fixed price of $10,000 per license (which is a



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 659
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




50% discount from ABC’s well-controlled list price of $20,000). The contract
includes an explicit promise to provide Tier 2 technical support to Reseller in
supporting its customers. Because ABC provides unspecified updates,
upgrades and enhancements to Reseller’s customers, the contract with
Reseller includes an implicit performance obligation to provide those
unspecified items. Both the Tier 2 technical support and the unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancement rights are determined to be distinct from
the licenses in the contract (see Questions C160 and C170). ABC accounts for
the technical support and the unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancement
rights as a single PCS performance obligation (see Question C150). Assume
that based on the allocation guidance in Topic 606 – see Chapter E – Step 4:
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract –
ABC allocates $1,800,000 to the 300 licenses and $1,200,000 to the three years
of PCS.
Reseller proceeds to immediately resell the 300 licenses to its end-user
customers. Six months later, ABC and Reseller enter into negotiations to
transfer 200 Product M term licenses from ABC to be transferred six months
from approval of the modification. That contract also includes explicit Tier 2
technical support and implicit rights to unspecified updates, upgrades and
enhancements to be provided to Reseller’s customers.
There was an unanticipated bug in the version of the Product K software that
was more significant than those that typically occur in ABC’s software releases.
Because Reseller is responsible for Tier 1 technical support for its customers, it
incurred unexpected technical support costs to help its customers navigate
around the bug until ABC issued a patch on March 31, 20X7.
Because of the performance issues, and in order to preserve goodwill with
Reseller (one of ABC’s largest customers), ABC agrees to provide Reseller a
credit in the form of an incremental discount on the 200 Product M licenses.
ABC agrees to sell the 200 Product M licenses to Reseller at a price of
$10,800 per license (a 55% discount from the list price of $24,000).
At the time the modification is approved, ABC recognizes the $240,000
incremental discount (200 Product M licenses × $1,200 [$12,000 (50%
discount) – $10,800 (55% discount)]) as a reduction of revenue for the
Product K licenses transferred. Absent the credit, ABC concludes that the
contract for 200 Product M licenses (and the related PCS) is a separate contract
– i.e. the Product M licenses (and related PCS) are distinct from the Product K
licenses (and related PCS) and the price for the Product M licenses (and related
PCS) reflect the stand-alone selling price for those items (see Question G90).
Because of the concession granted on the Product K licenses, ABC considers
whether, in accordance with paragraph 606-10-32-7, the separate contract for
the Product M licenses and PCS includes variable consideration in the form of a
potential price concession for those licenses as well. Despite the concession
granted on the Product K licenses, ABC concludes that Reseller would not
validly expect a concession again unless there were similar performance issues
with Product M as there were with Product K. Further, ABC does not have any
history of granting concessions for non-performance reasons, and ABC is able
to conclude that it is remote that any similar performance issues will arise with
Product M. Therefore, ABC concludes that the Product M contract does not
include variable consideration.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 660
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




Consequently, ABC recognizes contra-revenue of $240,000 when the contract
modification is approved related to the Product K licenses – i.e. because the
defect was attributable to the originally transferred Product K licenses, ABC
reflects the revenue reversal entirely as a reduction of software license
revenue. Assume ABC allocates the $2,400,000 in consideration attributable to
the Product M licenses and PCS ($12,000 × 200 Product M licenses) to the
licenses ($1,440,000) and the PCS ($960,000). ABC will recognize the
$1,440,000 allocated to the Product M licenses when control of the licenses is
transferred to Reseller and will recognize the $960,000 allocated to the PCS
over the three-year PCS period.



                  Example G80.2
                  Contract to extend SaaS arrangement that includes
                  a discount for past performance issues
SaaS Company G enters into a contract with Customer to provide its SaaS for
one year for a fee of $1,500 per month. The SaaS is a single performance
obligation comprised of a series of distinct services. The contract does not
include stated renewal options. With three months remaining in the contract,
Company G and Customer enter into a new contract that extends the service
for an additional year at $1,450 per month. $1,450 is below the stand-alone
selling price for the SaaS of $1,550 for this class of customer. The remaining
term of the original contract remains unchanged, and the entity will continue to
charge $1,500 per month for the remaining three months. There are no changes
to other terms or conditions of the original contract.
During the first eight months of the initial contract Customer experienced
service issues that were unanticipated at contract inception. The service issues
arose due to customer-specific circumstances that had not arisen previously in
other customer contracts. Concurrent with the negotiation of the SaaS renewal,
Customer communicates that it believes it should be entitled to compensation
for those service issues even though the contract did not provide for service
level penalties. Both Customer and Company G believe that, as of Month 9 of
the initial contract, the service issues have been resolved and will not recur.
Company G does not have any history of providing service level concessions
when none are stipulated in the contract; it agrees to do so in this case
because Customer is a new class of customer for Company G and it believes
its arrangement with Customer will attract other similar customers to its
SaaS solution.
As outlined in Question G70, performance issues and/or payment disputes
generally create a presumption that at least some portion of the discount in a
new contract, such as that in this example, is related to those performance
issues or payment disputes that must be overcome by other evidence.
Consequently, Company G accounts for the modification as follows:
— First, Company G concludes that it should account for the entire discount
  from stand-alone selling price of $100 per month ($1,550 – $1,450) in the
  renewal contract as compensation for the past performance issues
  encountered in the first eight months of the original contract term.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 661
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




      Company G concludes that this is reasonable given that the total discount
      for the 12-month renewal term of $1,200 equals 10% of the fees paid by
      Customer for the first eight months of deficient service under the original
      contract. 10% represents a reasonable service-level credit in the
      marketplace (e.g. when compared to entities that have explicit service-level
      provisions in their contracts). As a result, when the contract modification is
      agreed, Company G takes the $1,200 cumulative discount as a reversal to
      revenue recognized for the eight distinct months of SaaS it provided and for
      which there were service issues. The offsetting side of that revenue
      reversal is a contract liability, which will then be recognized into revenue as
      the renewal period SaaS is provided (see below).
— After reflecting the discount as a change to the transaction price for the first
  eight months of SaaS provided under the original contract, the remaining
  monthly consideration of $1,550 reflects the stand-alone selling price of the
  SaaS for the 12-month renewal period. Consequently, Company G does not
  adjust its accounting for the remaining three months of the original
  12-month contract term – i.e. Company G continues to recognize
  $1,500 per month (assume Company G has determined that a time-based
  measure of progress is appropriate for the SaaS performance obligation) for
  the remaining three months of the original 12-month term.
— Company G accounts for the 12-month renewal as a separate contract.
  Company G will recognize $1,550 in revenue each month for the SaaS
  provided during the renewal period, comprised of the $1,450 Company G
  will bill the customer plus $100 each month reversed from the $1,200
  contract liability established earlier.
— Because Company G believes that the initial service issues have been
  completely resolved and will not re-occur going forward, Company G does
  not expect to provide any further concessions to Customer, either for the
  remainder of the original contract term or for the renewal period. Similarly,
  Customer would not validly expect further concessions. Thus, there is no
  variable consideration to account for in the remainder of the original
  contract or the renewal contract.



                  Question G90
                  How should an entity evaluate the criterion in
                  paragraph 606-10-25-12(b) when the stand-alone
                  selling price of the additional distinct good or
                  service is highly variable or uncertain?
Interpretive response: Evaluating whether the criterion in paragraph 606-10-
25-12(b) is met for a contract modification that adds one or more goods or
services with a highly variable or uncertain stand-alone selling price may require
significant judgment. This is because a comparison of the additional
consideration to a stand-alone selling price (or even a narrow range of stand-
alone selling prices) is not possible.
Entities need to consider all relevant, available evidence in determining whether
the amount of additional consideration promised for the good or service reflects




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 662
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




its stand-alone selling price (as adjusted for particular contract circumstances).
For example:
— One approach would be to compare the additional consideration for the
  good or service (e.g. the software license) or bundle of additional goods or
  services (e.g. multiple software licenses, or a license and PCS if the stand-
  alone selling price of the bundle is highly variable or uncertain – see
  Question E110) against the range of stand-alone selling prices for that good
  or service (or bundle of goods or services) estimated in previous contracts
  with similar customers. It may be, in the case of software arrangements,
  that the only added goods or services, as a bundle, have a highly variable or
  uncertain stand-alone selling price (e.g. a modification may add a software
  license and PCS that, as a bundle, have a highly variable stand-alone
  selling price).
— Another approach would be to evaluate whether the additional
  consideration for the good or service (or bundle of goods and services)
  provides a discount to the customer that is incremental to the range of
  discounts reflected in the pricing of the goods or services in the original
  contract. For example, assume the original contract for a five-year software
  license and two years of PCS priced the license at a 60% discount from the
  entity’s list price (but priced the PCS at its stand-alone selling price – see
  Questions E130 and E140). In that case, a distinct license and PCS added
  through a contract modification (whether a renewal of the original license
  and PCS, or a new license and PCS to a different software product or
  granting additional rights to use the previously licensed product) would
  meet the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-12(b) if the additional
  consideration resulting from the modification provides the customer with
  no more than a 60% discount from the modification date aggregate list
  price of that license (assuming the PCS for the added license is also, like
  the PCS for the original license, priced at its stand-alone selling price). In
  such case, the fact that the discount offered on the additional license is not
  incremental to the discount offered on the license in the original contract
  would typically support that the discount in the modification relates solely
  to the additional goods or services.
      In some cases, the original contract may have been modified multiple times
      before the most recent modification was approved. In such cases, when
      applying this second approach, the discount in the modification should be
      compared against the discount(s) offered in the contract(s) or
      amendment(s) last entered into before the current modification date. For
      example, assume the original contract with the customer for a five-year
      software license and two years of PCS priced the license at a 60% discount
      from list price (and the PCS at its stand-alone selling price – see
      Questions E130 and E140). However, the parties have subsequently
      entered into a number of additional contracts to grant the customer (1) the
      right to use additional software products or (2) additional users or capacity,
      and related PCS on both. Assume that at the time of the current
      modification, the customer’s active licenses (i.e. those that have been
      renewed multiple times, as well as new licenses added in the most recent
      previous amendment) were priced at a 70% discount from list price, while
      the related PCS is priced at stand-alone selling price. That discount of 70%,
      while incremental to the discount in the amendment that preceded it, was




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 663
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




      considered an ‘appropriate adjustment to the stand-alone selling price’ (see
      Question G70). Therefore, when applying this approach to the current
      modification adding a new license and PCS, it would meet the criterion in
      paragraph 606-10-25-12(b) if the additional consideration resulting from the
      modification provides the customer with no more than a 70% discount
      from the list price of the new license (assuming the PCS is priced at stand-
      alone selling price).
      If the discount from list price in either of the two preceding paragraphs
      exceeded 60% and 70%, respectively, that would not automatically mean
      the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-12(b) is not met. The entity would still
      consider whether the incremental discount is an ‘appropriate adjustment to
      the stand-alone selling price’ (see Question G70).
Whatever approach an entity adopts, we would expect it to be applied
consistently in similar circumstances, and to the extent the entity’s approach
relies on established list prices, those list prices must be substantive. In
addition, changes to the price list should be subject to the entity’s internal
controls (including who can authorize its updating) and there should be a
process and controls for identifying any triggers resulting in adjustments to the
price list.



                  Example G90.1
                  Evaluating whether additional consideration reflects
                  the stand-alone selling prices of added goods and
                  services
ABC Corp. sells a perpetual software license to software Product A to
Customer along with three years of technical support and rights to when-and-if
available updates/upgrades (collectively, PCS). The contract price for the license
and the PCS is $400,000 and $216,000, respectively, which is paid upfront. ABC
does not sell its software licenses to Product A separately from PCS, but sells
Product A PCS separately through renewals. The list price for the Product A
license is $1,000,000; so the contract price for the license is a 60% discount
from list price. ABC’s price list is substantive and well controlled. ABC’s
customary business practice is to sell Product A PCS for one year at 18% of the
contractual license fee, and ABC has a substantial history of selling one-year
PCS renewals on a stand-alone basis at that price.
Two years after entering into the contract for the Product A license and PCS,
ABC and Customer enter into an amendment to grant Customer a perpetual
license to software Product B along with one year of PCS. The contract prices
are $300,000 and $60,000, respectively. The list price for the Product B license
is $600,000; so the contract price for the license is a 50% discount from list
price. ABC’s customary business practice is to sell one-year of Product B PCS
to customers similar to Customer for 20% of the contractual license fee, and
ABC has a substantial history of selling PCS renewals on a stand-alone basis at
that price.
ABC has concluded that the stand-alone selling price for a perpetual Product B
license is highly variable.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 664
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




Product B has been licensed on a perpetual basis to many similar customers
within the last few months, always bundled with one year of PCS.
Alternative 1
The Product B PCS is being sold at its stand-alone selling price (consistent with
Example E130.1). Therefore, ABC compares the discount from list price offered
on the Product B license in its previous Product B perpetual license sales to the
discount from list price given to Customer. The discount from list price in the
previous Product B perpetual license sales is calculated as the difference
between:
— the estimated stand-alone selling price established for the Product B license
  and
— the then-current ABC list price.
From this process, ABC determines that the normal range of discounts it has
previously provided from the list price on perpetual licenses of Product B is
40% to 60%. Therefore, the 50% discount from list price is not incremental to
the entity’s ‘normal’ discount range. Together with the fact that the PCS is
priced at its observable stand-alone selling price, and assuming the Product B
license and related PCS are distinct from the Product A license and PCS
promised in the original contract, ABC accounts for the Product B license/PCS
amendment as a separate contract in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-12.
Alternatively, if the normal range of discounts ABC previously provided from the
list price on perpetual licenses of Product B was lower than the 50% discount
offered to Customer (e.g. 25% to 40%), ABC would generally account for the
amendment as a contract modification. That is, unless the difference reflects an
‘appropriate adjustment’ to the stand-alone selling price of the license to reflect
particular contract circumstances – see Question G70 – the amendment is
treated as a contract modification, rather than as a separate contract.
Alternative 2
ABC compares the discount from list price granted on the Product B license of
50% to the 60% discount from list price provided on the Product A license in
the original contract with Customer. Consequently, again assuming the
Product B license and related PCS are distinct from the Product A license and
PCS promised in the original contract, ABC accounts for the Product B
license/PCS amendment as a separate contract in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-12.
Note:
If the discount from list price offered on the license to Product B was more than 60%,
ABC would generally account for the amendment as a modification to the original
contract – i.e. unless the difference reflects an ‘appropriate adjustment’ for the particular
contract circumstances (see Question G70).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 665
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Example G90.2
                  Evaluating whether additional consideration reflects
                  the stand-alone selling prices of added goods and
                  services that do not all have highly variable or
                  uncertain stand-alone selling prices
ABC Corp. sells a three-year term software license to software Product H to
Customer along with three years of technical support and rights to unspecified
updates, upgrades and enhancements (collectively, PCS) and professional
services to implement the software. The contract prices for the license, the
PCS and the professional services are $400,000; $216,000; and $200,000,
respectively. The list price for the Product H license is $1,000,000; so the
contract price for the license is a 60% discount from list price. ABC’s price list
is substantive and well controlled. ABC’s customary business practice is to sell
Product H PCS at a price equivalent to 18% of the contractual license fee per
year (so in a three-year license, the PCS fee would be 54% of the contractual
license fee). The $200,000 professional services fee reflects the observable
stand-alone selling price for ABC’s professional services (established through
stand-alone sales of professional services) – 800 anticipated hours at an
observable rate of $250 per hour.
One year after entering into the original contract, ABC and Customer enter into
an amendment to grant Customer a two-year term license to software
Product J along with two years of PCS and implementation services. The
contract prices are $300,000; $120,000; and $100,000 respectively. The list
price for the Product J license is $600,000; so the contract price for the license
is a 50% discount from list price. ABC’s customary business practice is to sell
Product J PCS to customers similar to Customer at a price equivalent to 20% of
the contractual license fee per year of the license term (so in a two-year license,
the PCS fee would be 40% of the contractual license fee). The $100,000
professional services fee reflects the observable stand-alone selling price for
ABC’s professional services (established through stand-alone sales of
professional services) – 400 anticipated hours at an observable rate of
$250 per hour.
ABC concludes that the stand-alone selling price for the Product J license and
co-terminus PCS as a bundle is highly variable because that price varies in direct
proportion to the widely varied discounts ABC grants on term licenses to
Product J.
Product J has been licensed to many similar customers within the last few
months, always bundled with co-terminus PCS; most of those customers have
also engaged ABC to implement the software. For those customers, ABC
used a residual approach when first allocating consideration between the
professional services and the Product J license and co-terminus PCS as
a bundle.
Alternative 1
In determining whether the additional consideration for the Product J license
and related services in the amendment reflects the stand-alone selling prices
for those items, ABC undertakes the following evaluation:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 666
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




— ABC first ‘carves off’ a portion of the additional consideration equal to the
  observable stand-alone selling price of the professional services.
— ABC then compares the discount from list price offered on the Product J
  license/PCS bundle in its previous Product J license sales as compared to
  the discount from list price given to Customer in this amendment
  (calculated as the difference between (1) the remaining, residual amount of
  the additional consideration in the amendment after carving off an amount
  equal to the observable stand-alone selling price of the professional
  services and (2) list price for the bundle).
ABC determines that the normal range of discounts it has previously provided
from the list price on licenses of Product J with bundled PCS is 35% to 55%.
Meanwhile, the discount from list price for the Product J license/PCS bundle in
the amendment is 50%. Therefore, the discount from list price in the
amendment is not incremental to the entity’s ‘normal’ discount range. Together
with the fact that the professional services to implement the Product J
software are priced at their observable stand-alone selling price, ABC concludes
that the additional consideration to be paid by Customer for the Product J
license, PCS and professional services reflects the stand-alone selling prices of
those items. Therefore, assuming the Product J license, the PCS and the
professional services are distinct from the license and services promised in the
original contract, ABC accounts for the Product J amendment as a separate
contract in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-12.
Alternative 2
Because ABC concludes the bundles of (1) the Product H license and co-
terminus PCS and (2) the Product J license and co-terminus PCS have a highly
variable stand-alone selling price, ABC calculates a blended discount from list
price for both the original contract and the amendment.1 The discount in the
original contract for the Product H license, the PCS and the professional
services from their aggregate list price is 53.1%, calculated as the total contract
price ($816,000 = $400,000 + $216,000 + $200,000) ÷ the total list price
($1,740,000 = $1,000,000 + $540,000 + $200,000). The discount from list price
in the amendment for the Product J license, PCS and professional services is
44.7%, calculated as the total amendment consideration ($520,000 = $300,000
+ $120,000 + $100,000) ÷ the total list price of the license and services added
in the amendment ($940,000 = $600,000 + $240,000 + $100,000).
Because the blended discount on the amendment of 44.7% is less than the
blended discount of 53.1% in the original contract, and assuming the Product J
license and related PCS are distinct from the license and services promised in the
original contract, ABC accounts for the Product J license/PCS/implementation
services amendment as a separate contract in accordance with paragraph 606-10-
25-12.
Note:
1.    The calculation illustrated may not be the only acceptable method for applying this
      alternative. Because ABC has observable stand-alone selling prices for its professional
      services, we believe it also would be acceptable in this scenario to carve off the contract
      and observable stand-alone selling prices for the professional services, in which case the
      discount in the original Product H contract for the license/PCS bundle from list price
      would be 60%, while the discount from list price in the Product J amendment for the
      license/PCS bundle would be 50%.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 667
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Question G100
                  When a modification is accounted for prospectively
                  in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a), is a
                  contract asset that exists at the modification date
                  written off?
Interpretive response: No. At the April 2016 TRG meeting, TRG members
agreed that a contract asset that exists at the modification date should not be
written off. Rather, any contract asset (in which case there would not be any
contract liability) is carried forward to the modified contract, less any
impairment resulting from the modification to the contract (e.g. because of the
loss of contractual fees for a canceled good or service or resulting from a price
change). TRG members observed that a write-off of the contract asset would
result in a reversal of previously recognized revenue, which would be
inconsistent with a prospective accounting model and the Board’s conclusions
articulated in the Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC78).
When a modification is accounted for prospectively in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-13(a), the guidance provides a specific formula to
determine the amount of consideration allocated to the remaining performance
obligations. Paragraph 606-10-25-13(a)(1) explicitly requires that the starting
point for that determination is the transaction price in the original contract less
what had already been recognized as revenue. A contract asset represents
revenue that has been recognized under the contract and, therefore, to
calculate the consideration to be allocated to the remaining performance
obligations the entity reduces the transaction price by the amount of the
contract asset that has been recognized (see Example G100.1 below).
[TRG Agenda Paper No. 51]




                  Example G100.1
                  Contract asset in a modification accounted for
                  prospectively as a termination of the original
                  contract and the creation of a new contract
ABC Corp. provides a hosted software solution to customers. Customers are
not permitted to take possession of ABC’s software. ABC and Customer enter
into a contract for Customer to use ABC’s SaaS for two years. ABC charges a
monthly fee of $10,000 during Year 1 and $15,000 in Year 2. The transaction
price for the contract is therefore $300,000.
ABC concludes that the SaaS performance obligation is satisfied over time (see
Question F130) and uses a time-elapsed measure of progress to recognize
revenue. ABC further concludes that the single performance obligation is a
series of distinct services in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-14(b).
In Year 1, ABC recognized $150,000 of revenue ($300,000 total transaction
price × 50% completion), which resulted in a contract asset of $30,000 because
the entity has only been entitled to bill $120,000 through the end of Year 1 –
i.e. further billings are conditional upon ABC providing the SaaS in Year 2.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 668
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




At the beginning of Year 2, ABC and Customer agree to modify the contract to
provide Customer access to an additional, distinct hosted solution (i.e. additional
SaaS) for Year 2 for $5,000 per month. The stand-alone selling price of the
added SaaS is $10,000 per month. The additional consideration to be charged
by ABC of $5,000 per month is a significant discount from the stand-alone
selling price for access to that solution. ABC concludes that the discount from
stand-alone selling price is not an ‘appropriate adjustment’ for particular contract
circumstances (see Question G70). Because the additional consideration for the
added distinct service does not reflect its stand-alone selling price and the
difference between the additional consideration and the stand-alone selling
price cannot be attributed to an ‘appropriate adjustment’, the modification is not
a separate contract in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-12.
Because the SaaS provided under the original contract is a series of distinct
services, the remaining services to be provided from the original SaaS and the
services to be provided from the added SaaS are each distinct from the SaaS
already provided before the modification. Consequently, the modification is
accounted for prospectively as a termination of the existing contract and
creation of a new contract in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a).
The consideration allocated to the remaining performance obligations is
calculated as follows.

 Transaction price in original contract                                                                            $300,000
 Less: Consideration previously recognized as revenue                                                                150,000
 Plus: Consideration promised in modification                                                                          60,000
 Total remaining revenue to be recognized                                                                          $210,000


The consideration allocated to the remaining performance obligations of
$210,000 is less than the amount of consideration the entity will receive under
the modified contract of $240,000 ($20,000 × 12 months). The difference
between the future billings and the amount that will be recognized as revenue
($30,000) will reduce the contract asset that exists at the modification date as
amounts are billed in excess of revenue recognized.

The following table illustrates the revenue that will be recognized and the
contract asset balance that will exist throughout the remainder of the modified
contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                     669
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




 12 remaining months of the modified                                               Revenue                Contract asset
 contract                                                                        recognized                     balance
 End of Month 1                                                                       $17,500                        $27,500
 End of Month 2                                                                         17,500                         25,000
 End of Month 3                                                                         17,500                         22,500
 End of Month 4                                                                         17,500                         20,000
 End of Month 5                                                                         17,500                         17,500
 End of Month 6                                                                         17,500                         15,000
 End of Month 7                                                                         17,500                         12,500
 End of Month 8                                                                         17,500                         10,000
 End of Month 9                                                                         17,500                           7,500
 End of Month 10                                                                        17,500                           5,000
 End of Month 11                                                                        17,500                           2,500
 End of Month 12                                                                      $17,500                        $          –




                  Question G110
                  How should an entity account for a modification
                  that decreases the scope of a contract?

Interpretive response: A decrease in scope may involve any of the following:
— the complete termination of the contract such that the entity has no
  obligation to transfer goods or services to the customer;
— canceling one or more, but not all, of the goods or services promised under
  the original contract – e.g. an entity and a customer may agree to terminate
  hosting services being provided by the entity if the customer decides to
  take possession of the software; or
— partially terminating one or more of the goods or services – e.g. shortening
  a contracted SaaS or PCS period.
A scope decrease modification can never be accounted for as a separate
contract because the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-12(a), which requires that
the modification add distinct goods or services, will never be met.
Therefore, the accounting for a scope decrease modification depends on
whether the remaining goods or services in the existing contract are distinct
from those goods and services transferred before the modification.
If the remaining goods or services are distinct from those transferred on or
before the date of the contract modification (e.g. in a long-term services
contract that is a series of distinct, shorter service periods – such as a SaaS
arrangement or a PCS renewal, at any point in time during the contract term,
the remaining services to be provided are distinct from those already provided),
the modification is accounted for prospectively as a termination of the existing




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 670
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




contract and the creation of a new contract in accordance with paragraph 606-
10-25-13(a).
If the remaining goods or services are not distinct from those transferred on or
before the date of the contract modification (e.g. services to complete in-
process software customizations), the modification is accounted for on a
cumulative catch-up basis in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(b).
Termination penalty in partial termination scenario
A partial termination may relate to a customer exercising an option to terminate
the contract. As discussed in Chapter B – Step 1: Identify the contract with the
customer, a substantive termination penalty evidences that rights and
obligations exist throughout the term to which the penalty applies – i.e. that a
termination option during that period is not substantive. Once the contract term
is established, the entity accounts for the contract on that basis – i.e. the
entity’s accounting for the contract ignores the termination option(s) and the
transaction price of the contract does not include the termination penalty. If the
contract is subsequently terminated (whether immediately, or with effect in the
future but before the initially determined contract term expires), the termination
is accounted for as a contract modification even though the terms and
conditions of the contract have not been changed (see Question B140). The
substantive termination penalty that the customer must pay is consideration
promised as part of the contract modification.



                  Example G110.1
                  Decrease in scope (and price) of PCS
ABC Corp. enters into a software license agreement with Customer to provide
a license to software Product X as well as premium technical support services
and the right to unspecified updates, upgrades and enhancements for
two years in exchange for total consideration of $150, $130 upfront and $20 at
the beginning of Year 2. Premium technical support entitles Customer to 24/7
technical support and faster support response times as compared to
standard support.
ABC concludes that the technical support services and the unspecified update,
upgrade and enhancement rights are a single PCS performance obligation (see
Question C150) that constitutes a series of distinct service periods (see
Question C140). The Product X license and the PCS are determined to be
separate performance obligations in this contract (see Questions C160 and
C170). Of the $150 transaction price, $100 is allocated to the license and $50 is
allocated to the PCS. Product X license revenue is recognized upon transfer of
control of the license to the customer (see Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize
revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation) – assume
that occurs at contract inception in this example. The PCS revenue will be
recognized over the 24-month service period, and ABC has determined that a
time-based measure of progress is appropriate (see Question F220).
At the beginning of Year 2 of the contract term, the parties modify the contract
to reduce the level of technical support from premium to standard. As of the
modification date, ABC has recognized revenue of $100 for the transfer of the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 671
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




Product X license and $25 for the PCS provided to date (i.e. $125 in total). ABC
has received $130 in payment from Customer and, therefore, has recorded a
contract liability of $5 ($130 – $125) at the modification date. As part of the
modification, the parties agree to a reduction in the overall price such that
Customer will make a second payment of only $10, rather than $20. Therefore,
the total consideration Customer will ultimately pay under the contract is $140
rather than the $150 originally agreed upon.
In this example, the remaining one year of PCS is distinct from both the
Product X license transferred to Customer at contract inception and the PCS
provided in the first year of the contract. Accordingly, the decrease in scope and
price is accounted for prospectively as a termination of the existing contract and
the creation of a new contract. In accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a),
$15 is allocated to the PCS that remains to be provided for the second year of
the contract (the $5 collected in payments not recognized as revenue – i.e. the
contract liability balance – plus the $10 remaining to be paid under the modified
contract) and will be recognized over the remaining 12-month PCS period,
continuing to use a time-based measure of progress.



                  Example G110.2
                  Partial termination of SaaS contract – no customer
                  termination right
SaaS Company G enters into a three-year contract with Customer to provide
Customer with access to its hosted software solution at $2,000 per month. The
contract does not provide Customer with a termination right. Company G
concludes the contract has a single performance obligation that consists of a
series of distinct services. Company G also concludes the performance
obligation is satisfied over time and uses a time-elapsed measure of progress to
recognize the transaction price. At the end of Year 1, G has recognized $24,000
of revenue ($72,000 transaction price × 1/3 complete).
At the beginning of Year 2, technological advances and competition in the
market has changed the needs of Customer for this particular solution. Both
parties agree to shorten the remaining term of the contract from two years to
one year (i.e. reduce the original three-year term by one year, to two years in
total). As part of this contract modification, Customer agrees to pay a
negotiated termination penalty of $12,000.
The criteria to account for the modification as a separate contract is not met
given the scope of the contract does not increase (i.e. no distinct goods or
services are added). Because the performance obligation is a series of distinct
services, the remaining SaaS periods subsequent to the modification are
distinct from those before the modification. Therefore, the modification is
accounted for prospectively as a termination of the original contract and the
creation of a new contract in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a).
Consequently, Company G allocates consideration to the remaining distinct
SaaS periods based on the original contract consideration that had not yet been
recognized as revenue plus the consideration promised as part of the
modification. The entity had not yet recognized $48,000 ($72,000 transaction




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 672
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




price – $24,000 recognized as revenue in Year 1) of the original transaction
price. The consideration received as part of the modification includes the
penalty of $12,000 and a reduction of the monthly payments of $24,000. As
such, Company G will recognize $36,000 ($48,000 + $12,000 – $24,000)
prospectively over the remaining year of the modified contract.



                  Example G110.3
                  Partial termination of SaaS contract that includes
                  customer termination right subject to termination
                  penalty
Assume the same facts as Example G110.2, except the contract includes a
termination clause that would allow Customer to shorten the contract by one
year (i.e. cancel the third year of the SaaS) at any time during the first two years
– Customer cannot cancel the third year of the contract after the end of the
second year. If Customer exercises its termination right, it is required to pay a
contractually specified termination penalty of $12,000. Company G concludes
the penalty is substantive and, therefore, considers the contract to have a
three-year term (see Question B140).
At the beginning of Year 2, Customer decides to exercise its option to cancel
Year 3 of the contract and pay the substantive termination penalty. Company G
accounts for this partial termination as a contract modification because the
scope of the contract decreases. Consistent with the termination payment
negotiated as part of the modification in Example G110.2, Customer’s
termination payment is accounted for as promised consideration under the
modified contract and recognized prospectively as consideration received as
part of the contract modification. Company G will recognize $36,000 ($24,000
contractual payment for Year 2 + $12,000 termination payment) prospectively
over the remaining year of the modified contract.



                  Question G120
                  How should an entity account for a contract
                  modification that consists of a change in price only?

Interpretive response: An entity would account for a contract modification that
affects only the price of a contract in the same way as a modification that
results in decreased scope (see Question G110). The change in price is
accounted for either prospectively or on a cumulative catch-up basis depending
on whether the remaining promised goods or services to be delivered as of the
date of the modification are distinct from those goods or services delivered
before the modification. This type of modification can never be accounted for as
a separate contract because the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-12(a), which
requires that the modification add distinct goods or services, will never be met.
If the remaining goods or services are distinct from those transferred on or
before the date of the contract modification (e.g. if the remaining services are
part of a series of distinct, shorter service periods – such as a SaaS



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 673
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




arrangement or a PCS renewal – at any point in time during the contract term,
the remaining services to be provided are distinct from those already provided),
the modification is accounted for prospectively.
If the remaining goods or services are not distinct from those transferred on or
before the date of the contract modification (e.g. services to complete in-
process software customizations), the modification is accounted for on a
cumulative catch-up basis.
Entities should be cognizant of the fact that any pattern (or customary business
practice) of granting price reductions to existing contracts, with no changes to
the scope of the contract (e.g. adding or reducing goods or services), will
generally ‘taint’ future contracts as having variable consideration, subject to the
Topic 606 guidance on variable consideration, including the constraint (see
Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price).



                  Example G120.1
                  Price decrease – SaaS arrangements
ABC Corp. provides customers with access to a hosted software solution for
which they generally pay a fixed monthly fee. Customers are not permitted to
take possession of ABC’s software; therefore, the arrangements are SaaS
arrangements. ABC and Customer enter into a contract for Customer to use
ABC’s SaaS for three years. ABC concludes that the SaaS is a single
performance obligation consisting of a series of distinct service periods –
i.e. each period (day, week, month, quarter) within the contract term is distinct
from the others.
At the end of Year 1, ABC and Customer agree to decrease the monthly fee on
a prospective basis. The decrease in fee is a result of technological advances
and competition in the marketplace. The change in price is not attributable to
prior service issues. Further, ABC does not have a pattern of granting price
decreases without a commensurate change in scope of the contract; therefore,
a price change was not expected at contract inception (i.e. there was not
variable consideration in the original contract).
The modification does not result in a separate contract because no additional
goods or services are added, and therefore the criterion in paragraph 606-10-25-
12(a) cannot be met. Because the SaaS performance obligation is a series of
distinct SaaS periods, the SaaS not yet provided as of the date of the
modification is distinct from the SaaS already provided to Customer pre-
modification. Consequently, ABC accounts for the modification prospectively,
as a termination of the existing contract and the creation of a new contract in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a). ABC will recognize the remaining
consideration to be paid for Years 2 and 3 of the contract plus any consideration
received from Customer but not yet recognized as revenue (i.e. any contract
liability balance) over the remaining two-year SaaS period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 674
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Example G120.2
                  Change in price in software customization contract
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to license software Product K
and to significantly customize the software for Customer’s use. The license and
the customization services are a single performance obligation, consistent with
the discussion (and example) in Question C230. Customer agrees to make
progress payments throughout the customization period, which is expected to
be approximately 18 months. The transaction price is fixed at $1,000,000. ABC
concludes that the single performance obligation is satisfied over time (see
Question F200). At contract inception, ABC expects the following.

 Transaction price                                                                                               $1,000,000
 Expected costs                                                                                                      600,000
 Expected profit (40%)                                                                                           $ 400,000


ABC applies a cost-to-cost input measure of progress to the combined
performance obligation. After eight months of the contract, ABC has satisfied
40% of its performance obligation measured on the basis of costs incurred
($240,000) relative to total expected costs ($600,000). The cumulative revenue
and costs recognized for the first year are, therefore, as follows.

 Revenue                                                                                                         $ 400,000
 Costs                                                                                                               240,000
 Gross profit                                                                                                    $ 160,000

At the beginning of Month 9, Customer notifies ABC that it intends to scale
back the scope of the customizations due to budgetary concerns resulting from
a downturn in their business – Customer indicates that they can effect cheaper
‘workarounds’ for certain tasks they originally intended ABC’s software to
perform. In the interest of maintaining a long-term relationship with Customer,
ABC agrees with Customer to reduce the contract price to $900,000 from
$1,000,000, without reducing the scope. ABC agrees to do this because the
margin it will earn based on that contract price is still acceptable to ABC. ABC
does not have a history of granting these types of price concessions to its
customers and the price reduction does not reflect any issues with ABC’s
performance under the contract (or any prior contracts). ABC also did not expect
Customer to experience the downturn it has experienced or to react to the
downturn by attempting to reduce the scope of its contract with ABC.
Therefore, ABC validly did not anticipate providing a concession to Customer
(note: ABC’s willingness to grant this concession should be considered by ABC
in future contracts when determining whether there is variable consideration in
those contracts). ABC considers the adjusted margin it will earn from the
contract subsequent to the price reduction as acceptable, but will not consider
any further price reductions under the present scope of the contract because
the resulting margin would not be acceptable.
At the date of the price change agreement, the remaining customization
services to be performed are not distinct from ABC’s performance to date.
Therefore, ABC updates the transaction price of the contract for the agreed



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 675
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




price change to $900,000 from $1,000,000 and records a downward revenue
adjustment of $40,000 (40% completion to date × $100,000 price reduction) as
of the date the modification is agreed. For the remainder of the contract, ABC
will base its revenue on its measure of progress to date in relation to the
revised, lower transaction price for the modified contract of $900,000.



                   Question G130
                   What is the appropriate accounting for a modification
                   that adds rights granted under a software license?

Background: A software license refers to a customer’s rights to use the
entity’s software, which may be effectively unlimited (e.g. perpetual, worldwide
and unlimited as to use) or restricted as to time, geography or use. A software
license will frequently provide rights of use for only a defined term and may
limit the customer’s use of the software to specific territories or uses (e.g.
embedding in a particular class of customer product only).
A modification may change the customer’s rights to use the entity’s software.
A modification could increase or decrease the customer’s rights to use the
software or grant the customer rights to use a different software product. A
modification typically, but not always, involves a change in consideration.
In a modification that add rights, the entity and the customer could agree to
expand the customer’s rights to use the entity’s software for additional fixed
fees or additional sales-based royalties. The expansion of rights could be similar
to the additional rights granted in Example 61B in Topic 606 (reproduced in
Chapter F), whereby the parties could agree to permit the customer to embed
the entity’s software in additional classes of the customer’s consumer
products.
See Question G131 for a discussion about modifications that decrease the
customer’s license rights.
Interpretive response: Because a license is a bundle of rights to use IP,
additional rights that must be granted to a customer represent one or more
additional licenses, even if those additional rights relate to use of the same
software product (see Question C10).
For example, the right described in the background to embed the entity’s
software in an additional class of the customer’s consumer products is an
additional software license granted to the customer – i.e. in addition to the
software license granted in the original contract – even though the customer
already has other rights to use the same software product.
The additional license will typically be distinct from the original software
license(s) and related services (e.g. PCS or hosting services). Therefore, the
accounting for the modification depends on whether the pricing of the
additional license is commensurate with stand-alone selling price after
considering appropriate adjustments.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 676
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




Price commensurate with stand-alone selling price
In this case, the modification granting the additional license(s) is accounted for
as a separate contract (see Questions G70 and G90).
Price not commensurate with stand-alone selling price
In this case, the modification granting the additional license(s) is typically
accounted for as a termination of the original contract and creation of a new
contract. In accounting for this type of modification, any previously recognized
revenue is not adjusted. The remaining, unrecognized consideration from the
original contract and the additional consideration from the modification, net of
any existing contract asset (see Question G100), is allocated to the remaining
goods and services to be provided under the modified contract (e.g. the new
license). The goods and services provided under the modified contract are the
additional rights granted, any new services related to those licenses and any
remaining services from the original contract such as remaining periods of PCS
related to the licenses transferred as part of the original contract.
See Question G140 for a discussion of when the amounts allocated to the
additional licenses are recognized.



                   Question G131
                   What is the appropriate accounting for a modification
                   that decreases rights granted under a software
                   license?
Background: Question G130 discusses modifications that add rights to use
software in a modification. A modification could also decrease a customer’s
rights to use software. Examples of modifications decreasing customer rights
to use software (i.e. its license rights) include:
— the parties agree to impose new restrictions on how the customer can
  employ the entity’s software in return for a decrease in the fees to be paid
  over the remainder of the license period;
— the parties agree to shorten the license term either for a reduction of fees
  or a refund of fees already paid;
— the parties agree to reduce the number of seat/user licenses in exchange
  for a reduction in fees; and
— the parties agree to convert the customer’s software license to a SaaS
  subscription, forfeit the customer’s existing license (Question G132
  addresses adding an option to convert a license to SaaS).
This Question is limited to the accounting for modifications that decrease a
customer’s license rights and not contracts where an explicit or implicit
customer right to return, exchange or convert its license rights was a part of the
original contract (see ‘Implied rights’ discussion in the response below).
Interpretive response: When previously transferred license rights are revoked
through contract modification, the revocation is generally accounted for as a
return of those rights (like the return of a good, given that a license is generally
accounted for as the transfer of a product at a point in time – see chapter F),




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 677
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




which typically results in a revenue reversal at the modification date (the return
approach).
However, there is an alternative view that the entity can or should account for
the modification prospectively (the prospective approach), without any revenue
reversal for the forfeited rights. Instead, the effect of the modification is solely
prospective (e.g. the license rights end for some seat licenses, while they
continue for others along with related PCS, or the license rights end and SaaS
commences in their place). Therefore, consistent with other prospective
modifications, no revenue reversal would result. [ASU 2014-09.BC78]
Issue 2 of EITF Issue 19-B “Revenue Recognition – Contract Modifications of
Licenses of Intellectual Property” was added to the FASB agenda to address
this diversity in practice in the accounting for the revocation of licensing rights
(including conversion of term software licenses to SaaS). The FASB
subsequently removed the project from its technical agenda without amending
US GAAP. As a result, this diversity in practice remains. Absent renewed action
by the FASB, or guidance from the SEC staff, we believe either approach is
acceptable and should be applied consistently to similar modifications.
Return approach
Under the return approach, a refund, credit or price reduction on remaining
elements of the contract (e.g. a price reduction on remaining PCS) attributable
to those revoked rights would be recognized as a reduction of revenue at the
modification date. The credit would include any amount netted within an overall
increase in consideration – e.g. because the modification also included the
addition of goods or services.
The amount attributable to revoked rights is a matter of judgment that depends
on the facts and circumstances. In most cases, we expect that amount would
consider the revenue initially recognized for those revoked rights (e.g. the
portion of the transaction price originally allocated to that license) and the rights
that have already been ‘consumed’ if a portion of the license term has passed
before the cancellation (see Example G131.1). However, in general we would
not expect the reversal to result in the entity recognizing revenue in excess of
stand-alone selling price for the remaining goods or services.
While we would generally expect a license cancellation to result in a revenue
reversal under the return approach, that may not always be the case. If there is
evidence to support that no refund, credit or price reduction was issued for the
value of the cancelled rights then it would typically be appropriate not to record
a revenue reversal. The following are examples of when no reversal may be
appropriate under the return approach:
— A license is cancelled and accompanied only by the addition of a distinct
  good or service for which the customer will pay an incremental amount of
  consideration that is commensurate with observable stand-alone selling
  price.
— A license is cancelled within a larger contract but no additional items are
  added in the modification, no explicit credit or refund is given, and the
  remaining consideration excluding a potential reversal to be allocated to the
  remaining goods or services after the cancellation reflects the stand-alone
  selling prices. For example, the modified contract includes a number of




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 678
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




      other licenses not being canceled and PCS for those remaining licenses
      with no added goods or services.
— A perpetual license is cancelled after the expiration of its economic life and
  there is no other evidence suggesting that the entity issued a refund, credit
  or price reduction for any remaining value of the license.
In addition, there may be other, more limited scenarios where there is evidence
that no value should be ascribed to the cancelled license.
Prospective approach
Under the prospective approach, if the only modification is the reduction in
license rights, the existing contract is deemed terminated and a new contract
created. Consequently, the remaining, unrecognized transaction price is
allocated to the remaining performance obligations in the new contract (e.g.
PCS over remaining licenses or new SaaS) and no previously-recognized
revenue is reversed. This may result in revenue being recognized for the
remaining performance obligations that is significantly below their stand-alone
selling prices.
Importantly, this approach only applies to a license rights reduction. If a license
rights reduction is coupled with other modifications to the contract, there may
still be a cumulative revenue effect at the modification date depending on the
nature of those other modifications (see Question G150).
Implied rights
A pattern of entering into modifications that permit a customer to reduce its
license rights should be considered by an entity when entering into new or
modifying other existing contracts. Such a pattern likely suggests there is an
implicit right of return or SaaS conversion option in these contracts at their
inception.
If a refund liability for a license or a material right has previously been
established, the subsequent exercise by the customer of its return right or
conversion option is not a contract modification. Questions C70, C80 and C85
discuss the accounting for software license return, exchange and SaaS
conversion rights, respectively, that exist at contract inception, whether explicit
or implied.
Because of this, the applicability of this Question – as compared to those
enumerated in the preceding paragraph – may be short-lived for many entities.
Once a pattern of entering into these types of modifications emerges, an entity
will generally be looking to the guidance in those questions to account for the
customer’s implied rights.



                  Example G131.1
                  Contract modification revoking rights previously
                  transferred
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer a license to
software product T and provide technical support and unspecified updates,
upgrades and enhancements (collectively, PCS) for a three-year period.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                  679
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




The following additional facts are relevant.
— The contract price for the license is $200,000 per year, while the contract
  price for the PCS is $120,000 per year (both fees paid annually in advance).
  In this example, payment of the license fee over time does not create a
  significant financing component.
— The contract term is determined to be three years because the parties have
  enforceable rights and obligations for the full three years – there are no
  cancellation or termination provisions.
— The PCS is determined to be a single performance obligation (see
  Question C150), while the software license and the PCS are determined to
  be separate performance obligations (see Question C170).
— The contract prices represent the stand-alone selling prices for each
  performance obligation. The stand-alone selling price of the bundled term
  license and PCS is highly variable (see Question E110).
— The software license is transferred to Customer at contract inception.
— The PCS is satisfied over time (see Questions F150 and F160), using a
  time-based measure of progress (see Question F220).
ABC records the following journal entry for Year 1.

                                                                                                    Debit               Credit
  Cash                                                                                          320,000
  Contract asset                                                                                400,000
  PCS revenue                                                                                                        120,000
  License revenue                                                                                                    600,000
  To recognize revenue on transferred software license,
  and establish contract asset and contract liability.


At the beginning of Year 2, ABC and Customer modify the contract; cancelling
Customer’s license to product T and the related PCS, and converting that
arrangement to a SaaS subscription for the remaining two years of the contract;
under the subscription, Customer will not have the right to take possession of
the product T software (i.e. will not take product T on-premise). As part of the
modification, Customer will continue to make annual payments of $320,000 in
advance, which represents the observable stand-alone selling price of the SaaS
at the modification date.
There were no customer cancellation or return rights in the original contract, nor
was there any reason (e.g. ABC’s customary business practices) for Customer
or ABC to infer that a right to cancel (i.e. return) the product T license at
contract inception existed. Consequently, ABC did not establish a refund liability
at contract inception and both the cancellation of the product T license and the
addition of the SaaS subscription at the beginning of Year 2 are modifications of
the original contract.
Because the modification adds a distinct SaaS subscription priced at its stand-
alone selling price but also cancels rights in the original contract, ABC accounts
for the SaaS subscription prospectively as a termination of an existing contract




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                  680
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




and creation of a new contract. ABC accounts for the contract modification
under either the return approach or the prospective approach discussed in
Question G131.
Return approach
ABC reverses the full amount of the contract asset associated with the revoked
license to product T because that reversal results in ABC recognizing revenue
for SaaS equal to observable stand-alone selling price.
As a result of the modification, ABC records the following entry at the beginning
of Year 2.

                                                                                                    Debit               Credit

  Cash                                                                                          320,000
  License revenue1                                                                              400,000
  Contract asset                                                                                                     400,000
  Contract liability                                                                                                 320,000

  To recognize effect of modification.

  Note:
  1.    Because the SaaS subscription is being sold at its observable stand-alone selling price,
        the entire existing $400,000 contract asset is determined to be attributable to the
        revoked product T license rights.


ABC will recognize $320,000 in SaaS revenue in each of Years 2 and 3.
Prospective approach
ABC does not reverse any amounts associated with the revoked license or
adjust the existing contract asset. To prospectively account for the modification,
ABC records the following entry in each of Years 2 and 3:

                                                                                                    Debit               Credit

  Cash                                                                                          320,000

  Contract asset                                                                                                     200,000
  SaaS Revenue                                                                                                       120,000
  To recognize payment received and SaaS revenue on a
  prospective basis




                   Question G132
                   What is the appropriate accounting for a modification
                   granting the customer the right to convert a software
                   license to SaaS?
Background: Question G131 addresses when a contract is modified to convert
a customer’s on-premise software license to SaaS. Similarly, Question C85



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 681
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




addresses contracts that grant the customer a right to convert an on-premise
software license to SaaS at inception.
This question addresses the related scenario in which a contract is modified to
grant the customer the option (or right) to convert its license to SaaS when that
option was not implicit in the contract pre-modification. Just like when a
conversion option exists at contract inception, the customer may or may not
exercise that option.
If the customer immediately exercises its option upon modification, we believe
the accounting would be similar to that outlined in Question G131.
Interpretive response: If the conversion price would increase the contract
price by an amount greater than or commensurate with the stand-alone selling
price of the SaaS, the customer would pay a substantive amount for both the
software license and the SaaS, if converted. As such, the conversion right is
effectively just a marketing offer that does not change the scope or pricing of
the existing contract. Consequently, there is no contract modification when the
option is granted. If the customer exercises that option, the SaaS arrangement
would be accounted for as a separate contract. [606-10-25-12, 55-43]
In contrast, adding a SaaS conversion option that is not solely a marketing offer
is a contract modification that changes the scope and/or price of the contract.
As outlined in Question C85, we believe there are two acceptable approaches
to account for a SaaS conversion option; to account for the option either as (1) a
right of return on the software license that can be converted, or (2) a material
right to the discounted SaaS. Question C85 outlines why we believe both
approaches are currently acceptable.
Like Question G131, this question presumes that the addition of the SaaS
conversion option is the only change in the modified contract. If other changes
are also made to the contract, those changes may affect the accounting for the
modification. For example, other changes to the contract other than adding the
SaaS conversion option may require a cumulative revenue adjustment.
Right of return approach
Under the right of return approach, the added right of return reduces the
transaction price because rights of return are accounted for as variable
consideration. Assuming no other changes to the transaction price from the
modification, which may not always be the case, recording the required refund
liability will trigger a reversal of revenue at the modification date.
The refund liability would be adjusted until the conversion right is exercised or
expires.
Material right approach
Under a material right approach, because all material rights are separate
performance obligations, the material right is distinct from the previously
satisfied performance obligations. Therefore, the contract modification would
be accounted for either: [606-10-55-42]
— prospectively, as a termination of the old contract and creation of a new
  one, if all the other remaining goods and services post-modification are
  distinct from the previously transferred goods and services; or




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 682
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




— with prospective and cumulative effect if there are remaining performance
  obligations post-modification that are not distinct from goods or services
  transferred (or partially transferred) pre-modification (see Question G150).
In many scenarios, the only remaining pre-modification performance obligation
is PCS. Therefore, a modification that adds a SaaS conversation right will be
accounted for prospectively, consistent with the first bullet. For those
modifications, any previously recognized revenue is not adjusted. The
remaining, unrecognized consideration from the original contract and the
additional consideration added by the modification, net of any existing contract
asset (see Question G100), is allocated to the remaining goods and services to
be provided under the modified contract (e.g. the remaining PCS and new
material right).
The entity then accounts for the material right in a manner consistent with the
accounting for any other material right, which includes deferring the amount
allocated to the material right until either (1) it is exercised and the underlying
goods and services are transferred or (2) it expires.



                  Question G140
                  Can an entity recognize license revenue for a period
                  that extends beyond the original license term
                  before the beginning of the extended period if the
                  entity and the customer terminate the original
                  license and enter into a ‘new’ license that includes
                  the remainder of the original term plus the
                  extension period?
Interpretive response: No. Topic 606 contains an explicit requirement to
recognize revenue attributable to the extension or renewal of a term license
no sooner than the beginning of the extension or renewal period (see
Question F100). This requirement applies regardless of whether the extension
or renewal is structured as an extension or renewal or as a termination of the
original license and creation of a new license. That is, whatever rights of use
are retained by the customer and extended as to duration after the ‘termination’
would remain subject to the renewal recognition requirements in
paragraph 606-10-55-58C; therefore, whatever portion of the modified
transaction price relates to the extension or renewal period rights cannot be
recognized until the extension or renewal period commences.
A license to intellectual property (including software) is a contracted bundle of
rights to use or access that intellectual property. Therefore, in conjunction with
a contract modification that ‘terminated’ the original software license, new
rights to use that software may be granted to the customer it did not control
before the modification. For example, the modification may permit the
customer to use the entity’s software for an additional purpose. In that case,
the portion of the post-modification transaction price allocated to those
additional rights (i.e. the additional license granting the customer incremental
rights to use the entity’s software) is recognized when the customer obtains




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 683
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




control over those incremental rights (see Chapter F – Step 5: Recognize
revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation).



                  Example G140.1
                  Term software license terminated and new license
                  with same rights entered into
Scenario 1
On January 1, 20X4, ABC Corp. and Customer entered into a three-year license
of ABC’s software Product H that commenced immediately. There were no
other promised goods or services in the contract. The contract price was $300,
paid upfront. ABC transferred control of the license on January 1, 20X4.
On January 1, 20X6, ABC and Customer enter into an amendment of their
license agreement, which immediately terminates the original three-year license
and grants a new four-year license to the same software product. No other
goods or services are added to the arrangement through the amendment. Other
than the extension of the term, the customer’s rights to use the software are
unchanged between the original license and the new license. The fee for the
new license is $300, payable at the time the amendment is entered into.
In substance, the original license is not terminated in this example; Customer
retains the same rights to use Product H post-modification as it had pre-
modification. Therefore, the modification adds a distinct three-year renewal
license that commences on January 1, 20X7 – i.e. subsequent to the end of the
original license period.
Because there are no other promised goods or services in the new, separate
contract, $300 in revenue is recognized when Customer obtains control of the
three-year renewal license, which, in accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-58C,
is the beginning of the renewal term (i.e. January 1, 20X7) – see Chapter F –
Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance
obligation). Even though Customer pays for the renewal license in advance of
obtaining control of that license, ABC does not need to consider whether there
is a significant financing component resulting from the advance payment
because the period of time between payment and transfer of the license is one
year or less. If that period of time were greater than one year, ABC would have
to consider whether the advance payment of the license fee creates a
significant financing component.
Scenario 2
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 1 except that the amendment terminates
the original three-year software license and grants a new perpetual license to
software Product H.
Consistent with Scenario 1, the original license is not terminated in this
example; Customer retains the same rights to use Product H post-modification
as it had pre-modification. Therefore, the modification adds a distinct perpetual
license that commences on January 1, 20X7 – i.e. subsequent to the end of the
original three-year license period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 684
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




The remainder of the accounting in this scenario follows that for Scenario 1,
ABC recognizes the $300 in consideration attributable to the perpetual software
license on January 1, 20X7, which is the beginning of the perpetual license
period. This result is also consistent with the discussion in Question C440 about
a customer’s exercise of an option to convert a term license to a perpetual
license.
Scenario 3
Assume the same facts as in Scenario 1 except that:
— the license fee for the original license is paid over time, annually in advance
  (i.e. $100 per year in advance, rather than $300 upfront);
— the modification is entered into before Customer makes its final $100
  (Year 3) payment for the Product H license; and
— the fees in the amendment are $400, paid annually in advance over the next
  four years, beginning on January 1, 20X6 (i.e. the modification date).
Note that for purposes of this scenario, the entity concludes that there is not a
significant financing component resulting from the license fees being paid over
time.
The extended payment terms do not change the substance of the arrangement
from that described in Scenario 1. The $100 payment made on January 1, 20X6
reduces the contract asset associated with the original license to zero. The
remainder of the accounting for the modification is consistent with that outlined
for the separate contract in Scenario 1 – i.e. the $300 in remaining consideration
is recognized as revenue when Customer obtains control of the three-year
renewal license, which, in accordance with paragraph 606-10-55-58C, is the
beginning of the renewal term (i.e. January 1, 20X7).



                  Example G140.2
                  Term software license terminated and new rights of
                  use granted
On January 1, 20X4, ABC Corp. and Customer entered into a three-year license
of ABC’s software Product H that commenced immediately. The license
permits Customer to embed Product H into Customer’s high-end kitchen
appliances. There were no other promised goods or services in the contract.
The contract price was $300, paid upfront. ABC transferred control of the
license on January 1, 20X4.
On January 1, 20X6, ABC and Customer enter into an amendment of their
license agreement, which immediately terminates the original three-year license
and grants Customer both (1) the continued right to embed Product H into
Customer’s high-end kitchen appliances for four years and (2) a new right to
embed Product H in its personal electronics for four years. Customer already
has a copy of Product H and is permitted to exercise both rights immediately
upon execution of the amendment. Customer agrees to pay $800 upon
execution of the amendment.
ABC concludes that there are two promised goods or services subsequent to
executing the amendment:



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 685
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




— a three-year renewal license for Customer to embed Product H in its high-
  end kitchen appliances; and
— a four-year license for Customer to embed Product H in its personal
  electronics products.
ABC further concludes that those two licenses are distinct from each other and,
therefore, separate performance obligations. Customer can benefit from each
license on its own and the promise to transfer each license is separately
identifiable – i.e. neither license customizes or modifies the other, ABC can
transfer each license independently of the other, and the two licenses do not
provide a combined functionality or utility that suggests ABC is providing a
combined output comprised of the two licenses.
Consistent with Example G140.1, the termination of the original three-year
license to Product H is not substantive; therefore, it is not considered in
determining the promised goods and services to be provided to Customer
subsequent to the contract amendment.
There is no remaining, unrecognized consideration from the original contract.
Therefore, the amount of consideration to be allocated to the remaining
performance obligations (i.e. the two distinct licenses) is the $800 promised in
the amendment. Regardless of the amount allocated to each license, the
portion allocated to the three-year renewal license is recognized at the
beginning of the renewal license term (i.e. January 1, 20X7), while the portion
allocated to the new four-year license will be recognized on January 1, 20X6 –
i.e. when Customer has obtained control over its right to use the software in its
personal electronics products.



                  Question G150
                  How should an entity account for modifications that
                  include some goods or services that are distinct
                  from those provided pre-modification and some
                  that are not distinct?
Interpretive response: A contract modification in which the criteria in
paragraph 606-10-25-12 are not met may include a combination of goods or
services that are distinct from those provided on or before the modification date
and some that are not distinct. That is, the remaining goods or services may be
a combination of items that, independently, would fall under the guidance in
paragraphs 606-10-25-13(a) and 606-10-25-13(b). In those circumstances, the
guidance requires an entity to account for the effects of the modification on the
unsatisfied (including partially satisfied) performance obligations in the modified
contract in a manner that is consistent with the objectives of the modification
guidance. However, Topic 606 does not provide guidance on how to determine
and allocate the remaining consideration in a contract modification of this type.
We believe one acceptable approach would be to first calculate the remaining
consideration, using the approach in paragraph 606-10-25-13(a), which is
outlined in the overview of this chapter, and allocate that consideration to the
remaining goods or services using the general Step 4 allocation model. After
that, the entity would recognize a cumulative catch-up adjustment to a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 686
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




performance obligation that, post-modification, includes goods or services from
the original contract and goods or services added by the modification. The
cumulative catch-up adjustment would generally apply an updated measure of
progress to the sum of (1) the remaining consideration allocated to the partially
satisfied performance obligation and (2) the revenue already recognized on that
performance obligation.
The entity would account for the goods or services added by the modification
that are distinct from the goods or services provided on or before the date of
the modification as separate performance obligations.
Revenue recognized for transferred goods or services (i.e. fully satisfied goods
or services) that are distinct from the remaining performance obligations is not
altered by the modification. We believe that any approach that results in the
reversal of previously recognized revenue associated with a transferred good or
service that is distinct (e.g. a software license for which control had previously
transferred or distinct services, such as hosting services or SaaS, already
provided as part of a single performance obligation that is a series of distinct
service periods) from the remaining goods or services would not be consistent
with the objectives of the modification guidance.



                  Example G150.1
                  Partially satisfied performance obligation and
                  additional distinct goods or services (combination
                  of methods)
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer for a perpetual software
license to Product Z and for significant services to customize Product Z for
Customer’s needs. The consideration for the license and the customization
services is $1,000,000. Company A has determined that the license and the
customization services are a single performance obligation (see Question C230)
and that revenue should be recognized over time (see Question F200) using a
cost-to-cost measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of the
performance obligation.
At the end of Year 1 of the anticipated two-year performance period, ABC has
satisfied 30% of the performance obligation. Therefore, ABC has recognized
$300,000 of revenue up to the end of Year 1.
At the beginning of Year 2, the parties agree to change some of the
customizations for Product Z and increase the consideration by $100,000.
Additionally, ABC agrees with Customer to transfer a perpetual license to
software Product X for $120,000.
The license to Product X is distinct from the combined Product Z software
customization performance obligation. The price of the Product X license is
significantly discounted from its stand-alone selling price of $150,000, and that
discount is not the result of adjustments that are ‘appropriate’ to the
circumstances of this contract (see Questions G70 and G90).
Because the price of the Product X license does not reflect its stand-alone
selling price and the discount from that stand-alone selling price is not the result




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 687
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




of adjustments that are appropriate to the circumstances of the contract, the
Product X license cannot be accounted for as a separate contract. Therefore,
both the Product Z performance obligation and the distinct Product X license are
considered part of the same contract when accounting for the modification.
ABC accounts for the modification as follows.
Step (i) – Calculate the remaining consideration

 Remaining consideration on original contract not yet recognized as
 revenue                                                                                                           $700,000
 Change order                                                                                                        100,000
 Product X license                                                                                                   120,000
 Total remaining consideration                                                                                     $920,000

Step (ii) – Allocate the remaining consideration between the Product Z
combined performance obligation and the performance obligation to
transfer a license to Product X
The remaining consideration of $920,000 is allocated to the Product Z
performance obligation and the Product X license as follows (see Chapter E –
Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the
contract).

                                                                  Stand-alone                   Percent           Allocated
                                                                 selling prices               allocated           amounts
 Remaining for Product Z software
 customization                                                        $ 900,000                   85.7%            $788,571
 Product X license                                                        150,000                 14.3%              131,429
 Total                                                               $1,050,000                                    $920,000

Step (iii) – Record a cumulative catch-up adjustment for the partially
satisfied performance obligation
For the partially satisfied performance obligation (Product Z software
customization), ABC accounts for the contract modification as part of the
original contract. Therefore, ABC updates its measure of progress and
estimates that it has satisfied 27.4% of its performance obligation after revising
its cost-to-cost measure of progress for the revised expected costs. As a
consequence, ABC records the following adjustment, which reduces revenue
previously recognized:
          $1,732 = (27.4% complete × $1,088,571 [$300,000 + $788,571] modified
          transaction price allocable to Product Z) – $300,000 revenue recognized
          to date.
When ABC transfers control of the license to software Product X it recognizes
revenue in the amount of $131,429.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 688
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Example G150.2
                  Partially satisfied performance obligation and
                  additional distinct software license (combination of
                  methods)
ABC Corp. sells a license to software Product A along with PCS (co-terminus
technical support and unspecified update, upgrade and enhancement rights
accounted for as a single performance obligation – see Question C150) for three
years and consulting services to Customer beginning on January 1, 20X6. The
stated consideration for the software license is $300,000. Stated consideration
for the PCS and the consulting services are $30,000 and $10,000, respectively.
The stated prices are commensurate with the stand-alone selling prices of
the items.
The terms of the license permit Customer to have 10 named users. ABC makes
available to Customer a copy of the software and Customer’s rights to use the
software commence on January 1, 20X6. ABC concludes that the software
license, PCS and consulting services are each distinct from the others and,
therefore, separate performance obligations. ABC has determined that revenue
related to the consulting services should be recognized over time using the
cost-to-cost input method. PCS qualifies as a series in accordance with
paragraph 606-10-25-14(b), and the consideration is recognized using a time-
elapsed measure of progress over the three-year PCS term.
At the end of Year 1, ABC has satisfied 30% of its performance obligation
related to the consulting services, therefore ABC has recognized $3,000 of
revenue up to the end of Year 1. In addition, ABC has recognized $10,000 of
revenue related to PCS up to the end of Year 1. ABC recognized the $300,000
of revenue related to the Product A license on January 1, 20X6.
At the beginning of Year 2, the parties agree to amend the license agreement to
permit Customer up to 20 named users (an increase from the right to 10 named
users granted on January 1, 20X6) for an additional fee of $100,000 for the
additional named users and $10,000 for incremental PCS for the remaining two
years of the existing PCS term. In addition, the parties agree to expand the
scope of the consulting services for additional consideration of $5,000.
ABC concludes that the incremental right to use Product A (i.e. an additional
10 named user license) is distinct from the original 10 named user license, but
concludes that the expanded consulting services are not distinct from the
consulting services provided under the original contract before the modification.
ABC next concludes that the $110,000 in additional consideration for the
additional license and incremental PCS do not reflect the stand-alone selling
price of those items. As such, the additional software license and the
incremental PCS are not accounted for as a separate contract.
ABC then concludes that in this arrangement, the additional license and the
remaining two years of PCS (the original and additional license PCS are
accounted for as a single performance obligation because they are co-terminus
and have the same time-based pattern of transfer to the customer) are separate
performance obligations that would typically be accounted for prospectively in
accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(a). Meanwhile, the expansion of the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                  689
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




consulting services represents a change in scope of a partially satisfied
performance obligation; the incremental services to be provided to fulfill the
expanded scope are not distinct from the previously provided services. This
portion of the modified arrangements would typically be accounted on a
cumulative catch-up basis in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(b).
However, because the modification incorporates scenarios that would be
accounted for in accordance with both paragraphs 606-10-25-13(a) and (b), ABC
accounts for the modification in accordance with paragraph 606-10-25-13(c).
Step (i) – Calculate the remaining consideration.

 Consideration in original contract not yet recognized as revenue (PCS)                                            $ 20,000
 Consideration in original contract not yet recognized as revenue
 (consulting services)                                                                                                   7,000
 Additional 10 user license                                                                                          100,000
 PCS for the additional 10 user license                                                                                10,000
 Consideration for expanded consulting                                                                                   5,000
 Total remaining consideration                                                                                     $142,000

Step (ii) – Allocate the remaining consideration between PCS, consulting
services and the license for the additional 10 users in accordance with the
allocation guidance in Step 4 of the model.

                                                             Stand-alone                    Percent               Allocated
                                                             selling price                allocated               amounts
 Remaining for initial PCS                                        $ 20,000                       7.9%              $ 11,218
 PCS for 10 additional users                                          20,000                     7.9%                  11,218
 License for an additional 10 users
 for two years                                                      200,000                    79.1%                 112,322
 Remaining consulting services                                        13,000                     5.1%                    7,242
 Total                                                            $253,000                   100.0%                $142,000

Step (iii) – Record a cumulative catch-up adjustment for the partially
satisfied performance obligation.
For the partially satisfied performance obligation (consulting services), ABC
accounts for the contract modification as part of the original contract. ABC
updates its measure of progress and estimates that it has satisfied 27.4% of its
performance obligation and calculates the following cumulative catch-up
adjustment, which reduces revenue by $194, calculated as follows:
          $194 = (27.4% × $10,242 [$3,000 + $7,242] modified transaction price
          allocable to the consulting services) – $3,000 revenue recognized to date.
The revenue allocated to the license for an additional 10 users ($112,322) is
recognized by ABC at the point in time Customer obtains control of the license
– i.e. when it can begin to use and benefit from the additional 10-named user
rights.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 690
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




The revenue allocated to the remaining and incremental PCS ($22,436 in
aggregate) will be recognized over the remaining two-year remaining PCS
period as ABC satisfies the remaining performance obligation.



                  Question G160
                  In the case of an unpriced change order that has
                  been determined to constitute a contract
                  modification, is the expected payment that has not
                  yet been approved variable consideration?
Interpretive response: Yes. Until the parties agree on the price for the change
order, the estimated fees are considered variable consideration. Once an
unpriced change order is determined to be a contract modification (see
Question G20), the entity estimates the variable consideration to which it
expects to be entitled, subject to the constraint on variable consideration. The
entity will then apply the constraint on variable consideration to determine the
updated transaction price. In applying the constraint on variable consideration to
a contract modification, the entity could consider the following (derived from
the factors an entity would use in applying the constraint on variable
consideration – see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price):
— whether there is expected to be a lengthy period of time before the
  amount of consideration to be paid relative to the change order can or will
  be determined;
— whether there are numerous factors that could affect the amount of
  consideration to which the entity would be entitled, and whether those
  factors are substantially in the control of the entity (e.g. does the entity
  control the timeline to complete the change order where the amount of
  consideration to which it will be entitled is dependent thereon); and/or
— whether the consideration to be paid for completing the change order is
  objectively determinable from the framework in a master services
  agreement or other governing document, rather than subjective (e.g. based
  largely on the success of a subsequent negotiation). If the entity is unable
  to support an expectation of payment by the customer for the change
  order, there would not be a contract modification until such time as there
  was an expectation of payment.
In circumstances where there is an expectation of payment and the estimated
fees are constrained, but the entity expects to recover its costs to fulfill the
change order, the entity should include the amount of the costs it expects to
recover from additional variable consideration as additional transaction price
resulting from the contract modification (i.e. a zero profit margin). The entity
would update the transaction price as it has more information about the amount
of variable consideration.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 691
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




                  Example G160.1
                  Accounting for a contract modification resulting
                  from an unpriced change order
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer for a perpetual software
license to Product Z and for significant services to customize Product Z for
Customer’s needs. The consideration for the license and the customization
services is $1,000,000. Company A has determined that the license and the
customization services are a single performance obligation (see Question C230)
and that revenue should be recognized over time (see Question F200) using a
cost-to-cost measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of the
performance obligation. The original project plan called for completion of the
project in 18 months.
At inception, Company A expects the following.

 Transaction price                                                                                               $1,000,000
 Expected costs                                                                                                      800,000
 Expected profit (20%)                                                                                           $ 200,000


After 15 months of the project, Customer requests that ABC make a complex
change to the planned customizations, and ABC concludes that the change to
the customizations is not distinct from the combined software customization
performance obligation in the original contract. ABC agrees and begins the work
immediately, which it expects to complete within five-six months. However, the
additional transaction price to be paid for the change will be negotiated
subsequently. ABC expects that it will get paid for the incremental efforts, and
therefore, concludes that the contract has been modified. At the date of
modification, ABC has incurred $600,000 of the estimated $800,000 in costs to
be incurred in completing the software customization project (i.e. the project is
75% complete), and therefore, has recognized the following.

 Revenue                                                                                                           $750,000
 Costs                                                                                                               600,000
 Gross profit                                                                                                      $150,000


ABC estimates that the change order will increase total costs by $200,000 and
expects that it will be entitled to additional fees of $300,000 based on the
complex nature of the changes being requested. ABC uses a most likely
approach to estimate the transaction price and believes that it has sufficient
experience in fulfilling complex change orders on similar contracts. Company A
believes that its experience is relevant and predictive because it is largely within
its control whether it completes the project and does so timely, and because it
believes the master services agreement provides a reasonable basis from
which to negotiate the change order consideration without a wide range of
subjectivity. In addition, the period of time to complete the order is not lengthy
in comparison to ABC’s typical projects or other change orders. Despite the fact
that ABC is confident in its estimate of $300,000, ABC concludes that there is
no more than a remote chance that it won’t be entitled to at least $240,000 for
the change order, consistent with the 20% profit margin expected in the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 692
                                                                                       G. Contract modifications




original contract. ABC considers whether it must constrain its most likely
$300,000 estimate to $240,000. ABC concludes that because $60,000
($300,000 – $240,000) is only 4.6% of the total contract price and that $60,000
will be recognized over time (i.e. over the five-six months remaining in the
project), the potential cumulative revenue reversal that would result would not
be significant (see Question D180).
Therefore, based on the quality of its estimate, and the fact that any potential
cumulative revenue reversal would not be significant, ABC does not constrain
its most likely estimate of $300,000 and adds that amount to the transaction
price for the contract.
Based on the revised estimate of costs, ABC adjusts its measure of progress to
60% ($600,000 incurred costs as compared to $1,000,000 total expected
costs). As a result, the cumulative revenue and costs to be recognized at the
date of the contract modification is as follows.

 Revenue1                                                                                                          $780,000
 Costs                                                                                                               600,000
 Gross profit                                                                                                      $180,000
 Note:
 1.     ($1,300,000 × [$600,000/$1,000,000]).


Therefore, at the date of modification, Company A would record an additional
$30,000 in contract revenue ($780,000 – $750,000 previously recognized =
$30,000). Company A would record the remaining $520,000 in contract revenue
($1,300,000 total transaction price – $780,000 recognized = $520,000) as the
software customization is completed.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                       Revenue for software and SaaS                 693
                                                                                                    H. Contract costs




H.   Contract costs
     Questions and Examples
     Scope
     Q&A H10                   Can an entity apply the portfolio approach when evaluating
                               contract costs under Subtopic 340-40?
     Q&A H20                   If another Topic specifies that a cost is not capitalizable, does
                               an entity then consider whether it is a capitalizable cost to
                               obtain or to fulfill a contract in accordance with Subtopic 340-
                               40?
     Q&A H30                   Does Subtopic 340-40 apply to software development costs?
                               Example H30.1: Costs incurred to fulfill a software
                               development contract
                               Example H30.2: Development costs incurred in a SaaS
                               arrangement
     Costs of obtaining a contract
     Q&A H40                   Do entities have an accounting policy election relative to
                               capitalizing incremental costs of obtaining a contract?
     Q&A H50                   What costs to obtain a contract are ‘incremental’, and
                               therefore, capitalized if they are expected to be recovered?
     Q&A H60                   If a commission will be paid only as the software entity or SaaS
                               provider invoices the customer, but there are no performance
                               requirements for the commission recipient after the entity
                               obtains the contract with the customer, is the entire
                               commission an incremental cost of obtaining a contract at
                               contract inception?
     Q&A H70                   Are commissions that are payable based on obtaining a
                               contract but also require additional, future performance or
                               service by the commission recipient ‘incremental costs of
                               obtaining a contract’?
                               Example H70.1: Salesperson performance requirement
     Q&A H80                   Is a payment that depends only partially on obtaining a contract
                               with a customer an ‘incremental cost of obtaining a contract’?
     Q&A H90                   Are commissions subject to customer performance after the
                               contract is obtained capitalizable?
     Q&A H100                  Does the reference to ‘a contract’ in paragraph 340-40-25-1
                               mean that costs incurred in relation to a pool of contracts
                               should not be capitalized?
                               Example H100.1: Incremental costs of obtaining a pool of
                               contracts




     © 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
     member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 694
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




Q&A H110                  Is a commission paid only after achieving a cumulative target an
                          incremental cost of obtaining a contract, and when would it be
                          recognized as an asset?
                          Example H110.1: Commission plan with tiered thresholds –
                          cumulative effect
                          Example H110.2: Commission plan with tiered thresholds –
                          prospective effect
Q&A H120                  If an entity pays commissions to personnel other than the
                          salesperson (e.g. a sales manager or sales support staff), are
                          those commissions capitalized (if recoverable)?
Q&A H130                  Should an entity capitalize commissions earned on contract
                          modifications that are not treated as separate contracts?
                          Example H130.1: Commission paid upon contract modification
Q&A H140                  Should an entity capitalize commissions paid to obtain contract
                          renewals?
Q&A H150                  Can the practical expedient apply to renewals of a contract, but
                          not the initial contract?
Q&A H160                  Can an entity apply the costs to obtain a contract practical
                          expedient if only one or some (but not all) of the goods or
                          services to which the contract acquisition costs relate will be
                          satisfied in one year or less?
Q&A H170                  Can the practical expedient for expensing costs to obtain a
                          contract as incurred be applied to commissions for which the
                          amortization period, if capitalized, would be only slightly greater
                          than one year?
                          Example H170.1: Practical expedient when amortization period
                          is slightly longer than one year
Q&A H180                  Are anticipated contracts (e.g. contract renewals) included
                          when determining whether the practical expedient applies?
Q&A H190                  What is the accounting if an entity applies the practical
                          expedient not to capitalize costs to obtain a contract but
                          subsequently determines that the amortization period is greater
                          than one year?
Q&A H200                  What should an entity consider with respect to fees paid to a
                          third party used to generate sales and provide implementation
                          services when applying the guidance in Subtopic 340-40?
Costs of fulfilling a contract
Q&A H210                  Can entities capitalize fulfillment costs incurred before approval
                          of the related contract (i.e. pre-contract costs)?
                          Example H210.1: Contract fulfillment costs in a specifically
                          anticipated service contract
Q&A H220                  Are costs related to fulfilling set-up activities capitalized under
                          Subtopic 340-40?



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 695
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




Q&A H230                  Are direct costs incurred in satisfying a present performance
                          obligation eligible for capitalization?
                          Example H230.1: Costs incurred in a SaaS arrangement
Q&A H235                  If an initial contract results in a loss but there is an expectation
                          that subsequent sales will be profitable, can the initial loss be
                          capitalized?
Amortization and impairment of contract cost assets
Q&A H240                  When should capitalized cost assets be amortized over a period
                          that is longer than the specified contract period – i.e. include
                          specifically anticipated renewal periods?
                          Example H240.1: Amortization period for contract cost assets
Q&A H250                  When is a renewal of a good or service ‘specifically
                          anticipated’?
                          Example H250.1: Amortization of costs over specifically
                          anticipated contracts
Q&A H260                  When is a commission paid for the renewal of a good (e.g. a
                          term license) or service ‘commensurate with’ a commission
                          paid on the initial good or service?
                          Example H260.1: Whether a commission paid for a renewal is
                          ‘commensurate’
Q&A H270                  If the amortization period for a contract acquisition cost asset
                          includes specifically anticipated renewal periods, should the
                          entire asset be amortized over that period or only the amount
                          that is incremental to the commission the entity will pay for the
                          renewal?
Q&A H280                  Can a contract cost asset be allocated solely to a good or
                          service (or bundle of goods and services) that is not distinct?
Q&A H290                  If a contract cost asset relates to more than one distinct good
                          or service, is the entity required to allocate that asset among
                          those distinct goods or services?
Q&A H295                  If an entity uses the single measure of progress approach to
                          amortize contract cost assets that relate to multiple distinct
                          goods or services, would straight-line amortization be
                          appropriate?
                          Example H295.1: Allocation and amortization of contract cost
                          assets (1)
Q&A H300                  What approaches are acceptable for allocating a contract cost
                          asset to the distinct goods or services to which it relates?
                          Example H300.1: Allocation and amortization of contract cost
                          assets (2)
Q&A H310                  Is a contract cost asset amortized consistent with the expected
                          pattern of transfer of the related good or service or the
                          expected pattern of revenue recognition?



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 696
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




Q&A H320                  Are sales- and usage-based royalties included in ‘the
                          consideration’ (paragraph 340-40-35-3(a)) when considering
                          contract cost asset impairment?
Q&A H330                  Is the amortization period and pattern for contract cost assets
                          and the revenue recognition pattern for nonrefundable upfront
                          fees symmetrical?
Q&A H340                  Are the remaining estimated contract costs used in the
                          impairment assessment discounted?
Q&A H350                  How often does an entity assess its contract cost assets for
                          impairment?
                          Example H350.1: Impairment of a contract cost asset




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 697
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




This chapter is organized into four sections:
—     Scope
—     Costs of obtaining a contract
—     Costs of fulfilling a contract
—     Amortization and impairment of contract cost assets

Scope
Overview

                  Excerpt from ASC 606-10

> Transactions
15-5 Subtopic 340-40 on other assets and deferred costs from contracts with
customers includes guidance on accounting for the incremental costs of
obtaining a contract with a customer and for the costs incurred to fulfill a
contract with a customer if those costs are not within the scope of another
Topic (see Subtopic 340-40). An entity shall apply that guidance only to the
costs incurred that relate to a contract with a customer (or part of that contract)
that is within the scope of the guidance in this Topic.



                  Excerpt from ASC 340-40

05-1 This Subtopic provides accounting guidance for the following costs
related to a contract with a customer within the scope of Topic 606 on
revenue from contracts with customers:
a. Incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer
b. Costs incurred in fulfilling a contract with a customer that are not in the
   scope of another Topic.
05-2 Paragraphs presented in bold type in this Subtopic state the main
principles. All paragraphs have equal authority.
> Overall Guidance
15-1 This Subtopic follows the same Scope and Scope Exceptions as outlined
in the Overall Subtopic (see Section 340-10-15), with specific qualifications and
exceptions noted below.
> Transactions
• > Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract with a Customer
15-2 The guidance in this Subtopic applies to the incremental costs of
obtaining a contract with a customer within the scope of Topic 606 on
revenue from contracts with customers (excluding any consideration payable
to a customer, see paragraphs 606-10-32-25 through 32-27).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 698
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




• > Costs Incurred in Fulfilling a Contract with a Customer
15-3 The guidance in this Subtopic applies to the costs incurred in fulfilling a
contract with a customer within the scope of Topic 606 on revenue from
contracts with customers, unless the costs are within the scope of another
Topic or Subtopic, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
a. Topic 330 on inventory
b. Paragraphs 340-10-25-1 through 25-4 on preproduction costs related to
   long-term supply arrangements
c. Subtopic 350-40 on internal-use software
d. Topic 360 on property, plant, and equipment
Subtopic 985-20 on costs of software to be sold, leased, or otherwise
marketed.



                  Excerpt from ASC 985-20

> Transactions
15-3 The guidance in this Subtopic does not apply to the following transactions
and activities:
a. Software developed or obtained for internal use (see Subtopic 350-40) or
   for others under a contractual arrangement (see Subtopic 605-35).
b. Research and development assets acquired in a business combination or
   an acquisition by a not-for-profit entity. If tangible and intangible assets
   acquired in those combinations are used in research and development
   activities, they are recognized and measured at fair value in accordance
   with Subtopic 805-20.
c. Arrangements to deliver software or a software system, either alone or
   together with other products or services, requiring significant production,
   modification, or customization of software (see the guidance on costs to
   fulfill a contract in Subtopic 340-40).


Subtopic 340-40 does not provide comprehensive guidance on the accounting
for contract costs. In many cases, entities continue to apply existing cost
guidance (e.g. guidance on inventory or property, plant and equipment).
However, the new standard added Subtopic 340-40 to apply to certain costs
incurred in relation to contracts with customers.

                                               Contract costs


          Costs of obtaining a
                                                                    Costs of fulfilling a contract
               contract




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 699
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                                  Subsequent measurement


     Amortization of assets                                            Impairment of assets
  arising from costs to obtain                                      arising from costs to obtain
       or fulfill a contract                                             or fulfill a contract


Subtopic 340-40 is intended to (a) fill the gap in contract costs guidance arising
from the withdrawal of existing revenue standards (e.g. construction-type
contracts in Subtopic 605-35), (b) improve practice and promote consistency in
certain areas by providing clearer guidance (e.g. set-up costs that, under legacy
US GAAP, are either expensed as incurred or deferred by analogy to guidance
not developed for those types of costs), and (c) promote additional convergence
between US GAAP and IFRS® Accounting Standards. However, substantial
convergence in cost accounting between US GAAP and IFRS Accounting
Standards would require a more significant undertaking to align US GAAP and
IFRS Accounting Standards guidance on topics such as inventory, property,
plant and equipment, intangible assets, and impairment of those assets.
The cost guidance in Subtopic 340-40 prescribes accounting only for
incremental costs to obtain a contract and certain costs to fulfill a contract not in
the scope of other US GAAP. Consequently, if other US GAAP precludes or
requires recognition of an asset arising from a particular cost, that guidance is
followed instead of Subtopic 340-40. For example, Subtopic 340-40 does not
amend the current guidance on accounting for (not all-inclusive):

  Type of cost                                                  Authoritative literature

  Credit-card related costs                                     Subtopic 310-10, Receivables − Overall
                                                                Subtopic 310-20, Receivables −
                                                                Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs
  Inventory costs                                               Topic 330, Inventory
  Production costs related to long-                             Subtopic 340-10, Other Assets and
  term supply arrangements                                      Deferred Costs—Overall
  Intangible assets, including internal-                        Topic 350, Intangibles − Goodwill and Other
  use software development costs and
  website development costs
  Costs of property, plant and                                  Topic 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment
  equipment
  Start-up costs                                                Subtopic 720-15, Other Expenses − Start-
                                                                Up Costs
  Advertising costs                                             Subtopic 720-35, Advertising Costs
  Research and development costs                                Topic 730, Research and Development
  Cable television initial subscriber                           Subtopic 922-360, Entertainment — Cable
  installation costs and reconnection                           Television — Property, Plant, and
  costs                                                         Equipment




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 700
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




  Type of cost                                                  Authoritative literature
                                                                Subtopic 922-720, Entertainment — Cable
                                                                Television — Other Expenses

  Film costs                                                    Subtopic 926-20, Entertainment − Films,
                                                                Other Assets – Film Costs
  Insurance acquisition costs                                   Topic 944, Financial Services − Insurance
  Upfront commissions paid to third-                            Paragraph 946-720, Other Expenses –
  party brokers who distribute fund                             Distribution Costs for Funds
  shares to investors
  Real estate project costs                                     Topic 970, Real Estate − General
  External-use software development                             Subtopic 985-20, Software − Costs of
  costs                                                         Software to be Sold, Leased, or Marketed



Questions & answers

                  Question H10
                  Can an entity apply the portfolio approach when
                  evaluating contract costs under Subtopic 340-40?
Interpretive response: Topic 606 and Subtopic 340-40 are both generally
applied to an individual contract with a customer. However, Topic 606 includes
a practical expedient (paragraph 606-10-10-4) that permits an entity to apply the
revenue model to a portfolio of contracts with similar characteristics if the entity
reasonably expects that the financial statement effects of applying Topic 606 to
that portfolio would not differ materially from applying it to the individual
contracts within that portfolio. Even though Subtopic 340-40 does not include a
similar provision, the practical expedient is available for costs in the scope of
Subtopic 340-40.
Topic 606 does not provide specific guidance on how an entity assesses
whether the results of a portfolio approach would differ materially from applying
the new guidance on a contract-by-contract basis. However, the Basis for
Conclusions to ASU 2014-09 (BC69) notes that the Boards did not intend for
entities, in order to use the portfolio approach, to have to quantitatively evaluate
the accounting outcomes from applying a portfolio approach and not applying a
portfolio approach.
In some circumstances when applying Topic 606 or Subtopic 340-40, an entity
will develop estimates using a ‘portfolio of data’ to account for a specific
contract with a customer. For example, entities may use historical data from a
population of similar contracts to develop estimates relevant to accounting for
contract costs in accordance with Subtopic 340-40 (e.g. estimates about
expected customer lives or collectibility – collectibility affects the “amount of
consideration that the entity expects to receive” when assessing impairment of
contract cost assets). The use of a portfolio of data to develop estimates
required to apply the guidance in Subtopic 340-40 is not the same as applying
the portfolio approach. When using a portfolio of data to develop relevant
accounting estimates (as opposed to using a portfolio approach), there is no



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 701
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




requirement to demonstrate that the effect of using that portfolio of data would
not differ materially from developing the estimate on a customer- or contract-
specific basis.



                  Question H20
                  If another Topic specifies that a cost is not
                  capitalizable, does an entity then consider whether
                  it is a capitalizable cost to obtain or to fulfill a
                  contract in accordance with Subtopic 340-40?
Interpretive response: No. Subtopic 340-40 only applies to contract costs that
are not addressed by other Topics. If another Topic requires a cost to be
expensed as incurred (e.g. research and development costs within the scope of
Topic 730), it is not then additionally considered for capitalization under Subtopic
340-40. Consequently, such costs are expensed as incurred in accordance with
Topic 730 and they are not evaluated for capitalization under Subtopic 340-40
even if they were to meet the fulfillment cost capitalization criteria in
paragraph 340-40-25-5.




                  Excerpt from ASU 2014-09

BC307. Because the Boards decided not to reconsider all cost guidance
comprehensively, paragraphs 340-40-25-1 through 25-8 specify the accounting
for contract costs that are not within the scope of other Topics. Consequently,
if the other Topics preclude the recognition of any asset arising from a
particular cost, an asset cannot then be recognized under Subtopic 340-40 (for
example, in U.S. GAAP, pre-production costs under long-term supply
arrangements will continue to be accounted for in accordance with
paragraphs 340-10-25-5 through 25-8, and in IFRS, initial operating losses, such
as those incurred while demand for an item builds, will continue to be
accounted for in accordance with paragraph 20(b) of IAS 16).



                  Question H30
                  Does Subtopic 340-40 apply to software
                  development costs?

Interpretive response: It depends. Software development costs that are in the
scope of either Subtopic 985-20, Software – Costs of Software to Be Sold,
Leased, or Marketed, or Subtopic 350-40, Internal-Use Software are accounted
for in accordance with that guidance, and are outside the scope of Subtopic
340-40. This is because Subtopic 340-40 only applies to costs that are not in the
scope of another Topic, such as Subtopic 985-20 or Subtopic 350-40. Chapter 2




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 702
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




of KPMG Handbook, Software and website costs discusses the scope of
Subtopics 985-20 and 350-40. [340-40-15-3, 606-10-15-5]
Contracts to develop software for others under a contractual arrangement are
excluded from Subtopic 985-20 and Subtopic 350-40. Those contractual
arrangements with customers are subject to Topic 606 and the entity generally
applies Subtopic 340-40 to the costs to fulfill the revenue contract. However,
before entering into the contract with a customer, Subtopic 340-40 would not
apply if the development costs would otherwise be accounted for under
Subtopic 985-20 or Subtopic 350-40. [350-40-15-4(c), 985-20-15-3(c)]
When the development costs are in the scope of Subtopic 340-40 and the
performance obligation to develop the software is satisfied over time, the
development costs will not be capitalizable under Subtopic 340-40 because they
relate to past performance (the partially satisfied customized software
development performance obligation). When the development costs are in the
scope of Subtopic 340-40 and the performance obligation to develop software
is not satisfied over time, the development costs may be capitalizable (see
Questions H210 – H230 for further discussion on capitalizing contract fulfillment
costs).
Example 2.3.10 of KPMG Handbook, Software and website costs, provides
examples of software development costs that are outside the scope of
Subtopics 985-20 or 350-40, and in the scope of Subtopic 340-40.



                  Example H30.1
                  Costs incurred to fulfill a software development
                  contract
ABC Corp. contracts with Customer to develop a customized software
application that will assist Customer in managing its worldwide operations. ABC
determines that the performance obligation is not satisfied over time due to
customer-specific acceptance provisions that ABC does not have relevant
history of meeting (see Question F210).
Because the customized software is being developed pursuant to a customer
contract, it is not in the scope of Subtopic 985-20, nor is the software within the
scope of Subtopic 350-40 because it will be sold to a specific customer.
Therefore, ABC considers the fulfillment cost guidance in Subtopic 340-40.
Because the costs relate directly to the software development contract with
Customer, generate resources (the software) ABC will use to satisfy its
performance obligation to transfer that software to Customer, and are expected
to be recovered (even if the contract is terminated), ABC capitalizes the contract
costs it incurs fulfilling this contract with Customer. In accordance with
paragraph 340-40-35-1, ABC will derecognize such costs at the point in time it
transfers control of the completed software to Customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 703
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Example H30.2
                  Development costs incurred in a SaaS arrangement
ABC Corp. contracts with Customer to provide access to its hosted software
application on a SaaS basis (i.e. Customer does not have the right to take
possession of the software, and therefore there is no software license in the
contract) for three years. As part of the contract with Customer, ABC agrees to
develop an additional functionality for its hosted application that it will introduce
into the multi-tenant environment before Customer ‘goes live’. It is expected it
will take ABC four-six months to complete and install the upgraded software
(i.e. with the additional Customer-requested functionality). Once the upgraded
software is implemented into the multi-tenant environment, all of ABC’s
customers in that environment will have access to the additional functionality.
ABC concludes that the fundamental nature of its performance obligation to
Customer is three years’ access to the SaaS offering (enhanced for the
additional functionality requested by Customer), which is a performance
obligation satisfied over time because Customer will consume and receive
benefit from that access as such access is provided over the SaaS period. ABC
further concludes that the best single measure of progress toward complete
satisfaction of that performance obligation is a time-elapsed output measure,
reflective of the generally equal value the customer will get from access to the
SaaS offering during the three-year period. Other measures of progress, such
as a cost-to-cost measure, are determined not to be appropriate because ABC
will incur most of its incremental costs during the relatively short development
period. Based on this measure of progress, no revenue is recognized during the
development period because Customer does not receive any benefit until it
obtains access to the SaaS offering after development is complete.
ABC incurs $100,000 in development and other direct costs (e.g. additional
coding and testing of the enhanced software) to develop the additional
functionality requested by Customer. ABC concludes that those costs are
within the scope of Subtopic 350-40 on internal-use software. Consequently,
ABC follows the guidance in Subtopic 350-40 in accounting for those costs.



Costs of obtaining a contract
Overview

                Excerpt from ASC 340-40

• > Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract
25-1 An entity shall recognize as an asset the incremental costs of obtaining a
contract with a customer if the entity expects to recover those costs.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 704
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




25-2 The incremental costs of obtaining a contract are those that an entity
incurs to obtain a contract with a customer that it would not have incurred if
the contract had not been obtained (for example, a sales commission).
25-3 Costs to obtain a contract that would have been incurred regardless of
whether the contract was obtained shall be recognized as an expense when
incurred, unless those costs are explicitly chargeable to the customer
regardless of whether the contract is obtained.
25-4 As a practical expedient, an entity may recognize the incremental costs of
obtaining a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of
the asset that the entity otherwise would have recognized is one year or less.
• • > Example 1—Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract
55-2 An entity, a provider of consulting services, wins a competitive bid to
provide consulting services to a new customer. The entity incurred the
following costs to obtain the contract:
External legal fees for due diligence                                                                                $15,000
Travel costs to deliver proposal                                                                                       25,000
Commissions to sales employees                                                                                         10,000
Total costs incurred                                                                                                 $50,000

55-3 In accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-1, the entity recognizes an asset
for the $10,000 incremental costs of obtaining the contract arising from the
commissions to sales employees because the entity expects to recover those
costs through future fees for the consulting services. The entity also pays
discretionary annual bonuses to sales supervisors based on annual sales
targets, overall profitability of the entity, and individual performance
evaluations. In accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-1, the entity does not
recognize an asset for the bonuses paid to sales supervisors because the
bonuses are not incremental to obtaining a contract. The amounts are
discretionary and are based on other factors, including the profitability of the
entity and the individuals’ performance. The bonuses are not directly
attributable to identifiable contracts.
55-4 The entity observes that the external legal fees and travel costs would
have been incurred regardless of whether the contract was obtained.
Therefore, in accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-3, those costs are
recognized as expenses when incurred, unless they are within the scope of
another Topic, in which case, the guidance in that Topic applies.
• • > Example 2—Costs That Give Rise to an Asset
55-5 An entity enters into a service contract to manage a customer’s
information technology data center for five years. The contract is renewable for
subsequent one-year periods. The average customer term is seven years. The
entity pays an employee a $10,000 sales commission upon the customer
signing the contract. Before providing the services, the entity designs and
builds a technology platform for the entity’s internal use that interfaces with
the customer’s systems. That platform is not transferred to the customer but
will be used to deliver services to the customer.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 705
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




• • • > Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract
55-6 In accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-1, the entity recognizes an asset
for the $10,000 incremental costs of obtaining the contract for the sales
commission because the entity expects to recover those costs through future
fees for the services to be provided. The entity amortizes the asset over seven
years in accordance with paragraph 340-40-35-1 because the asset relates to
the services transferred to the customer during the contract term of five years
and the entity anticipates that the contract will be renewed for two subsequent
one-year periods.
• • • > Costs to Fulfill a Contract
55-7 The initial costs incurred to set up the technology platform are as follows:

Design services                                                                                                    $ 40,000

Hardware                                                                                                             120,000

Software                                                                                                               90,000

Migration and testing of data center                                                                                 100,000

Total costs                                                                                                        $350,000

55-8 The initial setup costs relate primarily to activities to fulfill the contract but
do not transfer goods or services to the customer. The entity accounts for the
initial setup costs as follows:
a. Hardware costs—accounted for in accordance with Topic 360 on property,
   plant, and equipment
b. Software costs—accounted for in accordance with Subtopic 350-40 on
   internal-use software
c. Costs of the design, migration, and testing of the data center—assessed in
   accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-5 to determine whether an asset can
   be recognized for the costs to fulfill the contract. Any resulting asset would
   be amortized on a systematic basis over the seven-year period (that is, the
   five-year contract term and two anticipated one-year renewal periods) that
   the entity expects to provide services related to the data center.
55-9 In addition to the initial costs to set up the technology platform, the entity
also assigns two employees who are primarily responsible for providing the
service to the customer. Although the costs for these two employees are
incurred as part of providing the service to the customer, the entity concludes
that the costs do not generate or enhance resources of the entity (see
paragraph 340-40-25-5(b)). Therefore, the costs do not meet the criteria in
paragraph 340-40-25-5 and cannot be recognized as an asset using this Topic.
In accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-8, the entity recognizes the payroll
expense for these two employees when incurred.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 706
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                                                       They are incremental
      Would the costs be
                                                               costs.
    incurred regardless of
                                                        Are the incremental
    whether the contract is
                                             No        costs expected to be
          obtained?
                                                            recovered?
     [340-40-25-2 -- 25-3]
                                                           [340-40-25-1]

                      Yes                                                 No


    Do the costs meet the
   criteria to be capitalized                            Expense costs as
                                                                                                    Yes
     as fulfillment costs?                   No          they are incurred
         [340-40-25-5]


                       Yes




        Capitalize Costs




Incremental costs to obtain a contract are capitalized
An entity capitalizes incremental costs to obtain a contract with a customer –
e.g. sales commissions (and incremental fringe benefits such as additional
payroll taxes or 401k matching contributions incurred as a direct result of paying
the sales commission) – if it expects to recover those costs.
However, as a practical expedient that applies only to costs to obtain a contract
(i.e. the practical expedient does not apply to contract fulfillment costs), an
entity is not required to capitalize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract if
the amortization period of the contract cost asset would be one year or less. For
example, sales commissions paid on a contract to sell a software license to a
customer bundled with one year of post-contract customer support (PCS) or a
one-year software-as-a-service (SaaS) arrangement, and for which renewals are
either (a) not specifically anticipated (see Question H250) or (b) a
‘commensurate’ commission will be paid for any contract renewals (see
Question H260) are not required to be capitalized.
Whether to use the practical expedient is an accounting policy choice and can
be made when the amortization period associated with the asset that would
otherwise have been recognized is one year or less. See discussion of the
amortization period beginning with Question H240, which may be longer than
the term of the contract if renewals of the contract are specifically anticipated
and a ‘commensurate’ commission (i.e. commensurate to that paid for the initial
term) is not paid on the contract renewal. Consistent with other accounting
policy choices for which the relevant Topic does not specify at what level an
accounting policy choice is applied, the practical expedient related to contract
costs is applied on an entity-wide basis to all of its contracts that are eligible for
the expedient. That is, if an entity elects to apply the practical expedient, then it




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 707
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




applies the practical expedient across all of its business units or segments and
to all contracts that qualify for the expedient (regardless of whether the contract
that qualifies is a new contract with a customer or a renewal contract).

Only incremental costs are capitalized
Costs that are incurred regardless of whether the contract is obtained – e.g.
costs incurred in pursuing a contract – are expensed as incurred (unless other
accounting is prescribed by another Topic or the costs qualify for capitalization
as fulfillment costs). An example of such costs are costs to prepare a bid or
draft a contract, which would be incurred even if the entity does not obtain the
contract (i.e. the entity would owe its attorney legal fees for drafting the
contract even if the customer does not ultimately agree to the contract).
Salaries and other benefits that would be paid to employees (including sales
personnel) regardless of whether a contract was obtained are not ‘incremental
to obtaining a contract with a customer’. Fringe benefits that are incurred only
as a result of incurring the commission cost (e.g. payroll taxes or pension costs
the entity is required to additionally pay as a result of the commission earned by
the employee) are incremental costs.

Recovery of capitalized costs
Incremental costs to obtain a contract, if recoverable, are recovered through
direct or explicit reimbursement by the customer under the contract (i.e. direct
recovery) or through the net cash flows expected from the margin built into the
contract and any specifically anticipated future contracts with the customer (i.e.
indirect recovery).

Recognition of contract cost liabilities
The new revenue and contract cost guidance does not amend the US GAAP
guidance applicable to the recognition of liabilities, including liabilities arising
from a requirement to pay commissions to employees or third parties.
Therefore, entities should recognize liabilities in accordance with other
applicable US GAAP in the same manner that they did before the effective date
of Subtopic 340-40. If the item being accrued is not addressed by another
Topic, Subtopic 340-40 applies in determining whether the debit resulting from
the recognition of that liability results in the immediate recognition of expense
or a contract cost asset.
In some cases, an additional commission may be payable, or the original
commission amount adjusted, at a future date. Examples include (not
exhaustive):
— commissions paid for renewal of the contract;
— commissions earned on contract modifications;
— commissions contingent on future events (including continued employment
  by the commission recipient);
— commissions subject to clawback; and
— tiered commissions subject to a threshold.
In these cases, an entity considers the enforceable rights and obligations
created by the arrangement to determine when the liability is accrued and
whether to capitalize a commission, and in what amount. For example:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 708
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




— if an entity pays a commission of $100 upon commencement of a SaaS
  contract with a non-cancellable one-year term and agrees to pay an
  additional commission of $100 if the customer renews the contract at the
  end of the year, then the entity generally capitalizes only the initial
  commission of $100 on contract commencement. The entity evaluates the
  second commission of $100 for capitalization only when the customer
  renews the SaaS contract and, thus, it incurs the liability for the second
  commission. This is because the contract creates enforceable rights and
  obligations for both parties only for the initial contract period of one year;
  the entity does not accrue the second commission payment until it has a
  present obligation to pay that commission; and
— if an entity pays a commission of $100 on commencement of a contract
  with a non-cancellable two-year term and agrees to pay an additional
  commission of $100 on the first anniversary of the contract (without any
  further performance requirements on the part of the commission recipient),
  then the entity capitalizes $200 on contract commencement. This is
  because the contract creates enforceable rights and obligations for both
  parties for the contract period of two years. The entity accrues the first and
  the second payment because it has a present obligation and payment of the
  second installment depends only on the passage of time – i.e. the
  commission is not contingent on the sales person remaining employed; it
  was earned for obtaining the contract. An entity’s practice of not paying a
  promised commission installment (e.g. a payment due to a salesperson at
  the beginning of the second year of a contract) if the employee leaves the
  company before the payment date does not alter this analysis unless the
  entity’s practice in this regard renders such payments unenforceable
  legally. If a commission will be paid out over an extended period of time,
  the liability recognized by the entity would generally need to be discounted
  to its present value pursuant to Subtopic 835-30, Interest – Imputation
  of Interest.
In more complex scenarios, an entity focuses on whether its obligation to pay a
commission meets the definition of a liability. In general, if an entity recognizes
a liability to pay a commission that qualifies for recognition as an incremental
cost of obtaining a contract, then the entity recognizes an asset at the same
time. This will be particularly important when considering commission
structures that include thresholds – e.g. a commission amount that is payable
only if cumulative sales within a given period exceed a specified amount, or the
commission rate varies with cumulative sales.
The question over whether to use the practical expedient will be a key
implementation decision for some entities.
The assessment of whether the practical expedient applies is made at the
contract level. Generally, if a commission paid for a contract relates to multiple
goods or services and one or more of those goods or services will be satisfied
beyond one year from when the cost is incurred, then the practical expedient
will not apply. For example, the practical expedient would generally not apply to
a commission paid for obtaining a contract that includes a software license and
bundled post-contract customer support (PCS) for an initial two-year period.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 709
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




Interim reporting considerations
Entities reporting financial information on an interim basis in accordance with
Topic 270, Interim Reporting, frequently make estimates in assigning costs and
expenses to interim periods in accordance with paragraph 270-10-45-4(b) so
that interim period results more closely reflect anticipated annual results. For
example, entities will frequently estimate certain employee bonuses, and
accrue a proportion thereof during interim periods, even though the entity will
not owe the bonus to the employee if he/she terminates employment or
specified metrics are not met for the year. Such amounts, if related to obtaining
a customer contract, would result in recognizing a contract cost asset (see
Example H100.1).



                  Question H40
                  Do entities have an accounting policy election
                  relative to capitalizing incremental costs of
                  obtaining a contract?
Interpretive response: No. An entity does not have an accounting policy
election relative to capitalizing incremental costs of obtaining a contract. The
Boards considered whether to allow a policy election under which an entity
would be able to choose to capitalize or expense contract costs with disclosure
of the accounting policy election. However, the Boards concluded that policy
elections would reduce comparability. Consequently, the Boards decided not to
allow entities a policy election with respect to incremental costs of obtaining a
contract. Instead, the Boards included a practical expedient for costs that, if
capitalized, would have a short amortization period (i.e. one year or less).
In addition, while not explicitly stated in Subtopic 340-40, we understand that
the amortization period to be considered in determining the availability of the
practical expedient begins at the date the costs are incurred. The amortization
period in this respect does not refer to solely the period of time over which the
goods or services will be provided. For example, if an entity incurs $10,000 in
contract acquisition costs as a result of executing a contract on December 1,
20X0, and expects to satisfy the single performance obligation in the contract
over an 11-month period beginning April 1, 20X1, those costs would not be
eligible to be expensed when incurred on December 1, 20X0 using the practical
expedient. Therefore, if the entity in this example is a calendar-year public
reporting entity, the full, unamortized amount of those contract acquisition
costs would be reflected in the entity’s December 31, 20X0 and March 31,
20X1 balance sheets.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy SEC guidance, an entity can elect to capitalize direct and
incremental contract acquisition costs – e.g. sales commissions – in certain
circumstances. Under Subtopic 340-40, an entity capitalizes costs that are




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 710
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




incremental to obtaining a contract if it expects to recover them – unless it
elects the practical expedient for costs with amortization periods of one year or
less. This may affect those entities that currently elect to expense contract
acquisition costs, because they will now be required to capitalize them if the
anticipated amortization period for those costs is greater than one year.
Currently, some entities capitalize a portion of an employee’s compensation
relating to origination activities by analogy to legacy US GAAP on loan
origination fees. This is not permitted under the Subtopic 340-40, because
these costs are not incremental to a specific contract – i.e. an employee’s
salary and benefits are paid regardless of whether they successfully
consummate a sale.



                  Question H50
                  What costs to obtain a contract are ‘incremental’,
                  and therefore, capitalized if they are expected to be
                  recovered?
Interpretive response: Costs are incremental to obtaining a contract if, and
only if, it is the act of both parties approving the contract that triggers the
liability for that cost to the entity. For example, costs incurred in trying to obtain
a contract (e.g. sales efforts) or in negotiating a contract (e.g. non-contingent
legal fees incurred to draft a contract) that are incurred by the entity regardless
of whether the entity and the customer both approve the contract are not
‘incremental’ and, therefore, are expensed as incurred unless another Topic
prescribes a different treatment.
Example 1 in Subtopic 340-40 (included in the overview of this section)
illustrates this. Only the $10,000 in sales commissions are capitalized because
the other costs – i.e. the travel costs and legal fees related to due diligence –
are incurred regardless of whether the parties ultimately approve the contract.
Put another way, if, at the last second, the customer decides not to approve the
contract, the legal fees and the travel costs would still be incurred, and
therefore they are not ‘incremental’ to obtaining the contract. Only the sales
commission costs would be avoided by the customer ultimately deciding not to
approve the contract.
The above position was affirmed by TRG members at the November 2016 TRG
meeting (see TRG Agenda Paper No. 60).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 711
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Question H60
                  If a commission will be paid only as the software
                  entity or SaaS provider invoices the customer, but
                  there are no performance requirements for the
                  commission recipient after the entity obtains the
                  contract with the customer, is the entire
                  commission an incremental cost of obtaining a
                  contract at contract inception?
Interpretive response: Yes. The timing of payment of a commission does not
affect whether it is a cost incremental to obtaining a customer contract.
Invoicing the customer in accordance with the contract (e.g. at the beginning of
each year of the contract) is not a performance requirement. The entity would
accrue the entire commission at contract inception and recognize a
corresponding contract cost asset, unless the practical expedient applies
because the entire commission that would be capitalized at contract inception
would be amortized over a period of 12 months or less. If the commission will
be paid out over an extended period of time, the liability recognized by the
entity would generally need to be discounted to its present value.



                  Question H70
                  Are commissions that are payable based on
                  obtaining a contract but also require additional,
                  future performance or service by the commission
                  recipient ‘incremental costs of obtaining a
                  contract’?
Interpretive response: It depends. As outlined in Question H50, the premise of
the contract acquisition costs guidance in Subtopic 340-40 is that if a liability is
incurred because a contract with a customer was obtained, and that cost would
not have been incurred if the contract was not obtained (e.g. the customer
decided at the last minute not to approve the contract), it is an incremental cost
of obtaining a contract.
Conversely, if the action of the parties approving the contract does not trigger
the liability, rather it is another action or consequence that triggers the
obligation, the cost in question is not an incremental cost of obtaining the
customer contract. Other Topics will govern whether an asset, which would not
be a contract cost asset (unless it is a fulfillment cost), is recognized. This
applies regardless of the form of the commission (e.g. cash or equity).
Consequently, if no liability (or obligation) is incurred (including one to issue
equity securities) as a result of contract approval because future service is
required by the commission recipient to earn the payment, no contract
acquisition cost asset would be recognized.
We are aware of some SaaS arrangements in which commissions are due and
payable to the salesperson partially at contract inception (e.g. 50% or 60% of




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 712
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




the commission is due at contract inception) and the remainder only once the
initial year’s fee is paid by the customer. If the salesperson discontinues his/her
employment between contract inception and when the first-year fee is paid by
the customer, that second portion of the commission payment is not owed. In
general, if the period of time between contract inception and customer
payment is not significant, the service requirement would not be deemed
substantive. Therefore, we would not preclude an entity from recognizing the
entire commission liability at contract inception. Neither, provided there are no
other substantive requirements of the salesperson, would we object to the
entity recognizing the entire commission amount as a contract cost asset, even
if the entity accrues for the second installment of the commission only after the
initial year’s fee is paid by the customer. In this context, ‘significant period of
time’ is a matter of judgment, but both qualitative (i.e. the purpose for the
provision – e.g. is it fundamentally a cash management issue for the entity) and
quantitative (i.e. a shorter service period tends to a conclusion that the service
period is not significant) factors should be considered.



                  Example H70.1
                  Salesperson performance requirement
ABC Corp. enters into a three-year SaaS contract with Customer. In return for
obtaining the contract with Customer, ABC agrees to pay its salesperson a
commission of $120,000. The $120,000 commission will be paid in three
installments of $40,000 each. Each installment is payable to the salesperson at
the beginning of each year of the contract (i.e. at contract inception, at the
beginning of Year 2 and at the beginning of Year 3) provided that the
salesperson is still employed by ABC at that time.
Because there is, in effect, a ‘double trigger’ with respect to the second and
third commission payments – that is, the second and third payments include
both that the contract has been obtained and that the salesperson fulfill a
substantive performance requirement (i.e. remain employed for a significant
period of time between contract inception and the commission payment date) –
ABC does not accrue for the second and third payments of $40,000 each upon
obtaining the customer contract. Consequently, those amounts, when accrued,
are not incremental costs of obtaining a contract. Only the initial payment of
$40,000 is an incremental cost of obtaining the contract because only that
payment is accrued as a result of the contract having been obtained
(i.e. approved).
If no renewals are specifically anticipated (see Question H250), the $40,000 will
be amortized over the three-year contract term, which is consistent with the
transfer of the SaaS to which the incremental cost of obtaining the contract
relates.
Questions H240 – H310 discuss amortization of contract cost assets in
further detail.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 713
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Question H80
                  Is a payment that depends only partially on
                  obtaining a contract with a customer an
                  ‘incremental cost of obtaining a contract’?
Interpretive response: Any fixed amount owed to an employee that is not
owed directly as a result of entering into a contract with a customer, such as a
fixed salary to a sales manager, even if that fixed amount was established
based on an assumption of sales activity with customers, would not qualify for
capitalization under Subtopic 340-40, nor would a payment (however
characterized – i.e. ‘bonus’, ‘incentive payment’ or otherwise) paid based on
operating metrics (e.g. net or operating income, EBITDA or gross margin), even
if those metrics are significantly affected by sales activities. If a payment is not
due solely as a result of obtaining one or more customer contracts, such is the
case for a potential payment linked to operating metrics other than things like
new customer sales or bookings, it is not an ‘incremental cost of obtaining
a contract’.
Commission and bonus plans are often widely varied and complex. Therefore,
such plans will need to be carefully analyzed in order to determine whether
payments thereunder should be capitalized under Subtopic 340-40.



                  Question H90
                  Are commissions subject to customer performance
                  after the contract is obtained capitalizable?
Interpretive response: A commission plan that pays a salesperson in
installments over the contract period may stipulate that the salesperson will not
be paid further installments if the customer does not fulfill its obligation to pay
the entity under the contract. A commission plan may also pay the salesperson
his/her commission upfront but be subject to ‘clawback’ if the customer does
not fulfill its obligation to pay under the contract.
The TRG discussed this issue at the January 2015 TRG meeting and generally
agreed that customer nonperformance is not a consideration in determining
whether costs to obtain a contract that otherwise meet the criteria for
capitalization should be capitalized. This is because, for a contract with a
customer to even exist within the new revenue/contract costs model (i.e. for
the agreement to pass ‘Step 1’ of the revenue model – see Chapter B – Step 1:
Identify the contract with the customer), both parties to the contract must be
‘committed to perform their respective obligations’ (paragraph 606-10-25-1(a)).
Consequently, the accounting for incremental costs of obtaining that contract
should follow that conclusion. If circumstances subsequently change, such that
doubt arises about whether the customer will perform its future obligations,
then the entity would both (1) reassess whether there remains a valid contract
between the parties and (2) assess the contract cost asset for impairment in
accordance with paragraph 340-40-35-3. If a previously paid commission is
‘clawed back’ or an existing commission liability (e.g. related to a commission
that will be paid over time) is written off, the offsetting entry to the cash




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 714
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




received or the liability relieved will generally be to the contract cost asset.
However, if the cash received or the liability relieved is greater than the
unamortized balance of the related contract cost asset (e.g. because the
contract cost asset was previously impaired), the difference is recognized as a
contra operating expense.
As a reminder, the fact that the payment of the commission will occur over
time does not affect whether the full commission is capitalized upon obtaining
the contract (see Question H60); this point was also affirmed by the members
of the TRG.



                  Question H100
                  Does the reference to ‘a contract’ in paragraph 340-
                  40-25-1 mean that costs incurred in relation to a
                  pool of contracts should not be capitalized?
Interpretive response: No. Some entities structure their commission plans to
pay their salespeople based on a cumulative bookings amount or cumulative
contract value for contracts a salesperson obtains during a given period. If the
commission is payable based solely on obtaining the customer contracts – that
is, the amount payable does not also relate to other substantive actions of the
salesperson (e.g. his/her performance against personal development goals or
reducing other costs of obtaining customers or contracts) – the costs should be
capitalized if they are recoverable.
Other entities structure their commission plans based on an entity- or business
unit-wide cumulative booking or contract value target. For example, as
illustrated in Example H100.1, a commission ‘pool’ may be established by an
entity based entirely on customer contracts obtained at an aggregate level.
Individual salesperson commissions may or may not directly correlate to their
contributions to the aggregate target – e.g. Salesperson 1’s commission may
equal 5% of the value of customer contracts he/she obtained, but
Salesperson 2’s commission may equal 8% of the value of the customer
contracts he/she obtained. We do not believe how an entity allocates its
commissions to its salesforce affects whether the commissions are
incremental costs of obtaining contracts. Regardless of how an entity chooses
to allocate such amounts, if the costs are incurred solely because customer
contracts were obtained, they should be capitalized under Subtopic 340-40.
In each of these situations, entities will need to develop a consistent,
systematic and rational approach for amortizing such costs (i.e. determining
what the goods or services are to which the capitalized amounts relate) (see
Question H10).



                  Example H100.1
                  Incremental costs of obtaining a pool of contracts
ABC Corp. has a commission plan whereby all of its salespeople are paid an
annual amount based on whether the sales department achieved certain



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 715
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




bookings targets. Each salesperson is assigned a commission amount that
varies based on the achievements of the sales department as a whole in terms
of obtaining new and renewal customer contracts. For example, Jane
Salesperson will earn $10,000 if ABC obtains $10 million in new bookings,
$17,000 if ABC obtains $15 million in new bookings, or $25,000 if ABC obtains
$20 million in new bookings. In contrast, Joe Salesperson will earn $8,000,
$13,000 or $19,000, respectively, depending on which, if any, cumulative
bookings target is met. The amount Jane or Joe will earn based on the entity-
wide bookings target does not necessarily correlate with their contributions to
meeting the bookings target.
ABC follows the appropriate liabilities guidance in determining whether and
when to accrue amounts related to its commission plan. As it accrues the
annual commission payout, ABC concludes that the respective costs are
incremental costs of obtaining customer contracts. This is because the sole
reason ABC is accruing the respective commission liability is obtaining, or the
expectation of obtaining, customer contracts. The fact that the commission
amount is determined for a pool of customer contracts, rather than on an
individual contract basis, does not change that the commission amounts, if any,
that will be paid to ABC’s salespeople are incremental to obtaining customer
contracts and, therefore, within the scope of Subtopic 340-40.



                   Question H110
                   Is a commission paid only after achieving a
                   cumulative target an incremental cost of obtaining
                   a contract, and when would it be recognized as an
                   asset?
Interpretive response: The commission is recognized as a cost when a liability
is incurred and capitalized at that time if recoverable.
The TRG generally agreed that Subtopic 340-40 does not change when an entity
should accrue a commission-related liability. Subtopic 340-40 provides guidance
only as to whether the cost should be capitalized or expensed as incurred
(unless addressed by other topics).
Most TRG members agreed that if the amount accrued is incremental to
obtaining a customer contract and is expected to be recovered, then it should
result in a contract acquisition asset. Whether an accrual relates to a cumulative
contract acquisition target (such as X number of contracts, $XX in collective
customer booking or total contract value) or an individual contract does not
affect whether the cost is capitalized under Subtopic 340-40. [TRG Agenda Paper
No. 23, TRG Agenda Paper No. 57]

We understand there may be diversity in how entities accrue the cost of
commissions over interim periods in similar plans. For example, some entities
accrue commissions over interim periods based on their expectation of the total
commissions in an annual plan. Other entities may determine that a liability
does not exist until each specified threshold is triggered. The timing of liability
recognition could determine whether commissions achieved on meeting certain




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 716
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




thresholds are allocated to multiple contracts or the contract that triggers the
threshold being met. [TRG Agenda Paper No. 23]



                   Example H110.1
                   Commission plan with tiered thresholds –
                   cumulative effect
ABC Corp. has a commission plan whereby once a cumulative threshold based
on a number of contracts is reached, a commission is paid as a percentage of
the cumulative value of that contract and the preceding contracts, taking into
account any commission already paid.

  Number of contracts                                                                                        Commission
  1–10 contracts                                                                             1% of value of contracts
  11–20 contracts                                                                    4% of value of contracts 1-20
  21+ contracts                                                                    7% of value of contracts 1-20+


As contracts 1–10 are obtained, ABC owes the salesperson only 1% of the
contract value, which would be the minimum incremental cost of obtaining
each of those contracts. However, the applicable liabilities guidance may result
in ABC accruing cost in addition to the 1% because of an expectation of paying
additional commissions related to those contracts when other expected
contracts are obtained. ABC capitalizes those additional amounts as incremental
costs of obtaining customer contracts, if the one-year practical expedient does
not apply or has not been elected.
In this example, ABC initially accrues 1% based on the applicable liabilities
guidance when it enters into Contracts 1–4. However, by the time ABC enters
into Contract 5, it expects that it will enter into at least 11 contracts. At that
point, ABC adjusts its expectations and on entering into Contract 5, ABC
capitalizes a 4% commission related to Contract 5 and an additional 3%
commission related to Contracts 1–4 because 1% was already capitalized.
Note: We understand there may be diversity in how entities accrue the cost of
commissions over interim periods in similar plans, which is not addressed by
the guidance in Subtopic 340-40.



                   Example H110.2
                   Commission plan with tiered thresholds –
                   prospective effect
ABC Corp. has a commission plan whereby once a cumulative threshold
number of contracts is reached, a higher commission rate is paid on each
subsequent contract for the remainder of the year.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 717
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




  Number of contracts                                                                                        Commission
  1–10 contracts                                                                     1% of value of contracts 1-10
  11–20 contracts                                                                  4% of value of contracts 11-20
  21+ contracts                                                                       7% of value of contracts 21+

ABC owes only 1% of the contract value when the salesperson obtains each of
Contracts 1–10. However, ABC has a policy under Topic 270 for interim
reporting purposes of accruing commissions based on its expectation of the
annual commissions. [270-10-45-4(b)]
ABC estimates its full-year expectation of the salesperson obtaining 30 contracts
and accrues the weighted average of a 4% commission as each contract is
obtained. The amounts accrued in interim periods will be trued up to the annual
result.
ABC capitalizes each commission amount recognized as the liability is accrued
as a contract acquisition asset – assuming the one-year practical expedient does
not apply or has not been elected.
Note: We understand there may be diversity in how entities accrue the cost of
commissions over interim periods in similar plans, which is not addressed by
the guidance in Subtopic 340-40.



                  Question H120
                  If an entity pays commissions to personnel other
                  than the salesperson (e.g. a sales manager or sales
                  support staff), are those commissions capitalized (if
                  recoverable)?
Interpretive response: If a sales commission is directly attributable to, and
incremental from, obtaining a contract (and is expected to be recovered),
Subtopic 340-40 requires those amounts to be capitalized. Therefore, if a
regional sales manager (and/or any higher-level executive – e.g. a senior or
executive vice president) or a member of the sales support team earns a
commission that is directly attributable to obtaining one or more customer
contracts, and the practical expedient does not apply (or has not been elected),
the entity would be required to recognize a contract cost asset for that
commission, just as it would any commission paid to the ‘direct’ sales
representative that negotiated the contract. For example, if the direct sales
representative earns a commission of 5% of the contract value on a customer
contract (or bundle of contracts – see Question H100), and his/her supervisor,
the senior vice president of sales and/or a sales assistant each also get a 1%
commission on that contract, the entity would recognize a contract cost asset
for each of those commissions (i.e. 7% of the contract value).
Some have questioned whether this conclusion would also extend to a
commission paid to non-sales staff. For example, continuing the example from
the preceding paragraph, assume a person outside of the sales group or sales
hierarchy, with no direct or indirect (i.e. sales team support) role in selling to




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 718
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




customers, also earns a commission of 1% of the contract value on the
customer contract. While we do not believe this is a common occurrence, we
do not think the employee’s role within the organization (i.e. sales or non-sales
role) or ‘distance’ from the customer negotiation affects whether the
commission meets the definition of being an incremental cost to obtain a
contract with a customer. Therefore, we believe the 1% commission paid to
the non-sales employee is required to be capitalized if it is incremental to
obtaining the customer contract and is expected to be recovered.



                  Question H130
                  Should an entity capitalize commissions earned on
                  contract modifications that are not treated as
                  separate contracts?
Interpretive response: Yes. The TRG discussed this at its January 2015
meeting and concurred with the FASB and IASB staffs that, regardless of how
the contract modification is accounted for, incremental costs of obtaining the
modification should be accounted for in the same manner as incremental costs
of obtaining a customer contract.



                  Example H130.1
                  Commission paid upon contract modification
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to transfer a software license
to Product X and to customize that software for Customer’s needs. ABC pays
its salesperson a commission based on the contract price. That commission
is incremental from obtaining the contract with Customer and is expected to
be recovered.
Before the completion of the software customization, ABC and Customer
modify the contract through a change order. Under the change order ABC will
develop an additional customized feature for Customer for an additional fee. As
a result of obtaining the change order, the salesperson will obtain an additional
commission consistent with what the salesperson would have received had the
contract value reflected this additional feature at inception.
Even though the contract modification is not accounted for as a separate
contract, the increase in the contract price results in a cost – i.e. the
commission paid to Employee A – that is incremental to obtaining the modified
contract that is capitalized consistent with the initially paid commission.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 719
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Question H140
                  Should an entity capitalize commissions paid to
                  obtain contract renewals?
Interpretive response: An entity’s commission plan may provide its employees
with a commission for each new (i.e. initial) contract obtained with a customer,
as well as for each renewal contract (i.e. the renewal of existing contracts). For
example, a commission may be paid to a salesperson who obtains an initial
contract to provide SaaS to a customer, but also to a salesperson that obtains a
contract from an existing customer renewing the SaaS.
A renewal contract is no less of a contract than one for a contract with a new
customer under Topic 606 and Subtopic 340-40. Therefore, if a commission is
paid to obtain a renewal contract, and that commission is incremental to
obtaining that contract and is recoverable, the cost is capitalized just as any cost
is capitalized to obtain a contract with a new customer unless the practical
expedient applies and has been elected by the entity.



                  Question H150
                  Can the practical expedient apply to renewals of a
                  contract, but not the initial contract?
Interpretive response: Yes. An entity may find that its renewal contracts
qualify for the practical expedient, but not its initial contracts.
The commission on an initial contract, even one with a term of one year or less,
may not qualify for the practical expedient if (1) renewals are specifically
anticipated (see Question H250) and (2) commissions paid on renewals are not
‘commensurate’ with the initial contract commissions (see Question H260).
However, if the renewal period is one year or less and renewal commissions
are commensurate with each other (even if not commensurate with initial
contract commissions), the renewal commissions could qualify for the practical
expedient. In that case, if the entity has elected the practical expedient, the
entity will expense renewal commissions as incurred.



                  Question H160
                  Can an entity apply the costs to obtain a contract
                  practical expedient if only one or some (but not all)
                  of the goods or services to which the contract
                  acquisition costs relate will be satisfied in one year
                  or less?
Interpretive response: The assessment of whether the practical expedient
applies is made at the contract level. Generally, if a commission paid for a
contract relates to multiple goods or services and one or more of those goods
or services will be satisfied beyond one year from when the cost is incurred,
which may include goods or services that will be provided under a specifically



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 720
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




anticipated future contract, then the practical expedient will not apply. For
example, the practical expedient would not apply to a commission paid for
obtaining a contract that includes a software license and bundled post-contract
customer support (PCS) for an initial two-year period.
In contrast, the practical expedient may be applicable to a commission paid on a
contract with goods or services that will be transferred to the customer over a
period greater than one year if the contract acquisition costs are determined to
relate only to those goods or services that will be transferred to the customer in
one year or less (see Question H300).



                  Question H170
                  Can the practical expedient for expensing costs to
                  obtain a contract as incurred be applied to
                  commissions for which the amortization period, if
                  capitalized, would be only slightly greater than
                  one year?
Interpretive response: No. Entities may have administrative or other reasons
(e.g. standard billing practice) that result in a contract term slightly greater than
12 months (e.g. 12 months and 15 days). This may be the case even if the
contract period is intended to approximate one year. The practical expedient is a
bright-line exception to the contract cost capitalization requirement in
Subtopic 340-40. As with other exceptions in the accounting literature, they are
applied narrowly as written by the FASB. Consequently, costs for which the
amortization period would extend beyond one year, no matter by how much,
are not eligible for the practical expedient.



                  Example H170.1
                  Practical expedient when amortization period is
                  slightly longer than one year
SaaS Company C enters into arrangements with customers where if the
contract term and services begin at a date that is other than the 1st of the
month, the contract term will be set such that the end date is at the end of the
month after one year from the effective date. Therefore, unless the effective
date is on the 1st of the month, the contract term will be greater than one year
(i.e. services will be provided over a period longer than one year).
SaaS Company C enters into a contract with Customer A on December 10,
20X1. Based on its administrative practices, even though the effective date of
the contract is December 10, 20X1, the contract term will end December 31,
20X2. The Company has a commission policy for which its salespeople are paid
5% of sales at the time a contract is entered into and this cost is amortized over
the one year and three-week service period of the initial contract.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 721
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




In this scenario, SaaS Company C would not be able to apply the practical
expedient to expense commissions as incurred as a result of obtaining the
contract because the amortization period is longer than one year.



                  Question H180
                  Are anticipated contracts (e.g. contract renewals)
                  included when determining whether the practical
                  expedient applies?
Interpretive response: If specifically anticipated contracts (see Question H240)
would be included in the amortization period of the contract cost asset if it were
to be capitalized, those renewals factor into whether the practical expedient is
available because the practical expedient applies to the period over which the
costs would be amortized, not over the contract period.
For example, if a SaaS provider incurs incremental costs to obtain a one-year
contract with a customer for which renewals of that one-year contract are
anticipated and the SaaS provider will not pay commensurate commissions for
those renewals (see Question H260), the amortization period for the initial SaaS
contract commission would be greater than one year and the practical
expedient would not be available.



                  Question H190
                  What is the accounting if an entity applies the
                  practical expedient not to capitalize costs to obtain
                  a contract but subsequently determines that the
                  amortization period is greater than one year?
Interpretive response: The entity should consider the guidance in Topic 250 on
accounting changes and estimates. If changes in circumstances lead the entity
to change its earlier estimate as to the timing of the satisfaction of the
performance obligation, no accounting would be required for costs previously
expensed as changes in accounting estimates are accounted for prospectively.
However, if the earlier determination that the amortization period would be less
than a year was attributable to a misunderstanding of the facts and
circumstances that existed at contract inception and were reasonably available
to management at that time, leading to the entity inappropriately expensing the
contract acquisition costs, the entity would have an accounting error and would
need to assess the materiality of the error and any related correction to current
and prior periods to determine the appropriate process for correcting the error.
See section 3.4 and chapter 4 of KPMG Handbook, Accounting changes and
error corrections, for additional guidance on changes in accounting estimates
and error corrections.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 722
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Question H200
                  What should an entity consider with respect to fees
                  paid to a third party used to generate sales and
                  provide implementation services when applying the
                  guidance in Subtopic 340-40?
Interpretive response: An entity may use a third party to both generate sales
and to provide implementation (or other professional) services to its customers.
If that is the case, entities should allocate the fee on a systematic and rational
basis based on the nature of the activities performed by the third party. For
example:
— any portion of the fees paid to the third party that are incremental to
  obtaining the customer contract alone – i.e. attributable only to reselling the
  contract – should be accounted for in the same way as any other
  incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer;
— any portion of the fees that relate to the third party performing set-up
  activities should be accounted for consistent with any internal costs the
  entity would incur to perform those set-up activities – see Question H220;
  and
— any portion of the fees that relate to the third party providing services to the
  customer on the entity’s behalf (i.e. for which the entity is the principal for
  those services) should be accounted for in the same manner as any other
  fulfillment costs the entity would otherwise incur itself to fulfill its promise
  to provide those services to the customer – see Question H230.
Determining whether any portion of a third-party fee in an arrangement where
the third party will also be providing services on behalf of the entity is solely
incremental to reselling the customer contract will require judgment. It is
important to recall, just as for commissions paid to employees (see
Questions H70 and H80), costs that are incremental to obtaining a contract with
a customer include only those costs that are incurred solely as a result of
obtaining the contract. If payment of the entire fee is contingent on successfully
performing the services (or set-up activities), then no part is incremental to
obtaining the customer contract.



Costs of fulfilling a contract
Overview

                  Excerpt from ASC 340-40

• > Costs Incurred in Fulfilling a Contract with a Customer
15-3 The guidance in this Subtopic applies to the costs incurred in fulfilling a
contract with a customer within the scope of Topic 606 on revenue from




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 723
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




contracts with customers, unless the costs are within the scope of another
Topic or Subtopic, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
a. Topic 330 on inventory
b. Paragraphs 340-10-25-1 through 25-4 on preproduction costs related to
   long-term supply arrangements
c. Subtopic 350-40 on internal-use software
d. Topic 360 on property, plant, and equipment
e. Subtopic 985-20 on costs of software to be sold, leased, or otherwise
   marketed.
• > Costs to Fulfill a Contract
25-5 An entity shall recognize an asset from the costs incurred to fulfill a
contract only if those costs meet all of the following criteria:
a. The costs relate directly to a contract or to an anticipated contract that the
   entity can specifically identify (for example, costs relating to services to be
   provided under renewal of an existing contract or costs of designing an
   asset to be transferred under a specific contract that has not yet been
   approved).
b. The costs generate or enhance resources of the entity that will be used in
   satisfying (or in continuing to satisfy) performance obligations in the future.
c. The costs are expected to be recovered.
25-6 For costs incurred in fulfilling a contract with a customer that are within
the scope of another Topic (for example, Topic 330 on inventory;
paragraphs 340-10-25-1 through 25-4 on preproduction costs related to long-
term supply arrangements; Subtopic 350-40 on internal-use software;
Topic 360 on property, plant, and equipment; or Subtopic 985-20 on costs of
software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed), an entity shall account for
those costs in accordance with those other Topics or Subtopics.
25-7 Costs that relate directly to a contract (or a specific anticipated contract)
include any of the following:
a. Direct labor (for example, salaries and wages of employees who provide
   the promised services directly to the customer)
b. Direct materials (for example, supplies used in providing the promised
   services to a customer)
c. Allocations of costs that relate directly to the contract or to contract
   activities (for example, costs of contract management and supervision,
   insurance, and depreciation of tools and equipment used in fulfilling
   the contract)
d. Costs that are explicitly chargeable to the customer under the contract
e. Other costs that are incurred only because an entity entered into the
   contract (for example, payments to subcontractors).
25-8 An entity shall recognize the following costs as expenses when incurred:
a. General and administrative costs (unless those costs are explicitly
   chargeable to the customer under the contract, in which case an entity
   shall evaluate those costs in accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-7)
b. Costs of wasted materials, labor, or other resources to fulfill the contract
   that were not reflected in the price of the contract
c. Costs that relate to satisfied performance obligations (or partially satisfied




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 724
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




   performance obligations) in the contract (that is, costs that relate to past
   performance)
d. Costs for which an entity cannot distinguish whether the costs relate to
   unsatisfied performance obligations or to satisfied performance obligations
   (or partially satisfied performance obligations).


Entities often incur costs to fulfill a contract once it is obtained but before
transferring goods or services to the customers. For example, a SaaS provider
may incur costs associated with set-up activities subsequent to securing the
contract that do not provide a service to the customer. There may be costs
incurred in anticipation of winning the contract. In those situations, the standard
requires that the costs be associated with a specific anticipated contract – i.e.
the revenue contract with the customer may not be finalized at the time the
costs are incurred.
Entities are required to first determine whether the appropriate accounting for
these costs are addressed by other applicable literature. If the costs incurred to
fulfill a contract are in the scope of other guidance, then the entity accounts for
them in accordance with that other guidance.
If the costs incurred in fulfilling a contract with a customer are not in the scope
of other guidance – e.g. inventory, intangibles, or property, plant and equipment
– then an entity recognizes an asset only if the fulfillment costs meet the
following criteria:
— they relate directly to an existing contract or specific anticipated contract;
— they generate or enhance resources of the entity that will be used to satisfy
  performance obligations in the future; and
— they are expected to be recovered.

   Are the costs incurred in
     fulfilling the contract
   within the scope of other                                      Apply the other Topics
                                                       Yes
              Topics?
         [340-40-25-6]

                             No


     Do the fulfillment costs
     meet the criteria to be
                                                                         Capitalize costs
          capitalized?                                 Yes
         [340-40-25-5]

                             No


     Expense costs as they
         are incurred




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 725
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




The following are examples of costs that may or may not be capitalized when
the specified criteria are met.

  Direct costs that are                                           Costs required to be
  eligible for capitalization
  if other criteria are met
                                                                  expensed when they are
                                                                  incurred
                                                                                                                    
  Direct labor – e.g. employee wages                              General and administrative costs –
                                                                  unless explicitly chargeable under
                                                                  the contract


  Direct materials – e.g. supplies                                Costs that relate to satisfied
                                                                  performance obligations


  Allocation of costs that relate                                 Costs of wasted materials, labor
  directly to the contract – e.g.                                 or other contract costs
  depreciation and amortization


  Costs that are explicitly                                       Costs that do not clearly relate to
  chargeable to the customer under                                unsatisfied performance
  the contract                                                    obligations



Questions & answers

                  Question H210
                  Can entities capitalize fulfillment costs incurred
                  before approval of the related contract (i.e. pre-
                  contract costs)?
Interpretive response: Fulfillment costs (not governed by other Topics, such as
start-up costs within the scope of Subtopic 720-15 or research and
development costs within the scope of Subtopic 730-10) can be capitalized
under Subtopic 340-40 if they relate to specifically identifiable anticipated
contracts, which includes unpriced change orders expected to be approved,
assuming they also meet the other criteria in paragraph 340-40-25-5 for
capitalization. Those other criteria are that the costs generate or enhance
resources of the entity that will be used in satisfying future performance
obligations (the performance obligations that will be created by the contract if it
is obtained) and are expected to be recovered.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 726
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Under legacy US GAAP (for those contracts within the scope of Subtopic 605-
35), pre-contract costs directly associated with a specifically anticipated contract
were capitalizable if their recoverability from that contract was probable and
they were not start-up costs within the scope of Subtopic 720-15. Capitalization
of pre-contract costs was limited to contracts within the scope of Subtopic 605-
35 (i.e. long-term construction- and production-type contracts).
Under Subtopic 340-40, pre-contract costs that meet the criteria for
capitalization in paragraph 340-40-25-5 are required to be capitalized, regardless
of the type of contract.
The requirement to potentially capitalize pre-contract costs in situations other
than those that were previously within the scope of Subtopic 605-35, such as
contracts to significantly modify or customize software, may be new for entities
that are required to do so.



                  Example H210.1
                  Contract fulfillment costs in a specifically anticipated
                  service contract
PS Co. provides cloud-based services, including access to its software on a
SaaS basis. PS previously entered into a master services contract with
Customer X, under which it has been named a preferred provider. Under the
preferred provider contract, PS expects to enter into a number of individual
contracts (e.g. multiple statements of work) with Customer X.
PS will be reimbursed for certain costs incurred in anticipation of, and related to,
future cloud-based contracts regardless of whether the contract is ultimately
executed. PS incurs labor costs in anticipation of, and which specifically relate
to, a contract with Customer X. A portion of those costs are subject to the
reimbursement provisions of the preferred provider contract, while the
remainder are not. PS has performed similar services in anticipation of similar
professional services contracts for Customer X in the past. Customer X has
fulfilled its obligations under the preferred provider contract in each case.
In this example, PS capitalizes the labor costs that the preferred provider
agreement specifies PS will be reimbursed for regardless of whether there is an
executed contract because those costs are explicitly reimbursable. Additionally,
for costs that are not explicitly reimbursable under the preferred provider
agreement, PS will be required to evaluate whether:
— the costs are directly attributable to a specifically anticipated future
  contract;
— the costs enhance resources of the entity that will be used in satisfying a
  future performance obligation (the services under the anticipated contract);
  and
— the costs are expected to be recovered.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 727
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




Based on PS’s historical experience, and the nature of work and costs incurred
for Customer X, PS determines those costs can be capitalized because they
meet each of the three criteria outlined above.
PS’s accounting for the costs and the reimbursements from Customer X varies
depending on whether PS obtains the specific contract to which the incurred
costs relate. If the contract is not ultimately obtained, any capitalized costs that
will not be reimbursed are expensed once it is clear the contract will not be
obtained. Meanwhile, any capitalized costs to which PS is entitled to
reimbursement would be converted from a contract cost asset to a receivable.
If the contract is obtained, all of the capitalized pre-contract costs are accounted
for consistent with any other capitalized fulfillment costs and the
reimbursement for those costs becomes part of the transaction price of the
obtained contract.



                  Question H220
                  Are costs related to fulfilling set-up activities
                  capitalized under Subtopic 340-40?
Interpretive response: SaaS providers often incur costs related to set-up
activities – i.e. activities that do not transfer a promised good or service to the
customer, as do some on-premise software licensing entities that provide
hosting services. Costs incurred to fulfill a promised good or service should be
distinguished from costs incurred as part of performing set-up activities.
Question C220 addresses distinguishing set-up activities from promised
services in software licensing and SaaS arrangements.
Entities will be required to capitalize costs related to set-up activities, because
such costs do not relate to satisfying a performance obligation (see
paragraph 340-40-25-8(c)), provided that those costs directly relate to a
customer contract (or specific anticipated customer contract), are expected to
be recoverable and generate or enhance resources of the entity. Set-up
activities frequently, but not always, generate or enhance resources of the
entity to permit them to provide services to the customer (e.g. SaaS or hosting
services), and generate revenues from those services, in the future.
Costs incurred to fulfill a promised service (e.g. implementation, configuration
and/or customization services) are discussed in Question H230.




                  Comparison to legacy US GAAP

Although there is no specific authoritative guidance under legacy US GAAP,
fulfillment costs are generally expensed as they are incurred for arrangements
outside the scope of Subtopic 605-35. For certain set-up costs, however,
entities may make an accounting policy election under SEC staff guidance to
either expense or capitalize these costs.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 728
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




Entities that currently have an accounting policy to expense set-up costs will be
required to capitalize them under Subtopic 340-40 when the requirements for
capitalization are met. Entities that already capitalize such costs may not find
their accounting for such costs significantly changed in that, under the SEC staff
guidance and under Subtopic 340-40, the amounts capitalized and the
amortization period for such capitalized costs will likely be similar.



                  Question H230
                  Are direct costs incurred in satisfying a present
                  performance obligation eligible for capitalization?
Interpretive response: Unless the costs are addressed by another Topic (e.g.
software development costs, which are addressed by Subtopic 350-40 for
internal-use software and Subtopic 985-20 for software that is or will be
licensed to customers), the answer is generally no. In order for fulfillment
costs that are not within the scope of another Topic to be capitalizable,
paragraph 340-40-25-5 specifies that the costs must ‘generate or enhance
resources of the entity that will be used in satisfying (or in continuing to satisfy)
performance obligations in the future.” “Costs that relate to satisfied
performance obligations (or partially satisfied performance obligations) in the
contract (that is, costs that relate to past performance)” are expensed as
incurred (see paragraph 340-40-25-8(c)). This means that contract costs incurred
in fulfilling a promised good or service (e.g. costs incurred to fulfill software or
SaaS implementation services, even if they are not distinct (see Chapter C –
Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract)) are not
capitalizable unless either:
— they are ‘pre-contract costs’ incurred in anticipation of providing a good or
  service under a contract with a customer in the future (and they are
  expected to be recovered); or
— they are costs incurred to permit the entity to fulfill a performance
  obligation that will be satisfied in the future.
Contract costs incurred in fulfilling a performance obligation satisfied over time
are expensed as incurred even if that results in recognizing fulfillment costs
ahead of or subsequent to recognizing the related revenue. This might occur,
for example, if the entity determines that an appropriate measure of progress
for the performance obligation is a measure other than cost-to-cost and
fulfillment costs are greater in earlier (or later) stages of the project. TRG
agenda paper No. 53, and the related discussion of the TRG at the April 2016
TRG meeting, made clear that an appropriate measure of progress applied to a
performance obligation satisfied over time should not result in the recognition
of work in process (or a similar asset) from an entity’s performance under a
specific contract.
This would include, in our view, situations in which performance has
commenced (i.e. the entity has performed part of a service), but the single
measure of progress the entity has concluded is appropriate for the
performance obligation does not yet result in revenue being recognized (e.g.
see Questions F240 and F270). In those cases, the fulfillment costs to satisfy
the performance obligation are expensed as incurred on the basis of



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 729
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




paragraph 340-40-25-8(c), even if that occurs in the infrequent circumstance
where costs are incurred before any revenue being recognized on the
performance obligation based on the measure of progress selected.
The preceding paragraph notwithstanding, some may not view fulfillment costs
incurred before any revenue is recognized (based on the single measure of
progress selected) as relating to a satisfied or partially satisfied performance
obligation – i.e. they do not ‘fail’ the criterion in paragraph 340-40-25-8(c) – such
that the costs might, in limited circumstances, qualify for capitalization under
paragraph 340-40-25-5 (i.e. if those criteria are all met, including that those
costs generate or enhance resources of the entity).
Reimbursable costs
The discussion in this question applies equally to fulfillment costs that are
reimbursable under the terms of the customer contract – e.g. travel-related
expenses or costs of supplies incurred by the entity in fulfilling software or
SaaS professional services that are reimbursable from the customer. Chapter D
– Step 3: Determine the transaction price, addresses the accounting for the
customer’s reimbursement of such expenses.



                  Example H230.1
                  Costs incurred in a SaaS arrangement
This is a continuation of Example C220.1.
ABC Corp. enters into a contract to provide Customer with access to its SaaS
for three years. As part of the contract, before commencement of the SaaS
term, ABC will set up the user interface that Customer will need to access the
online application, and will also undertake data conversion and migration
activities for Customer to configure and move its relevant, existing data from
Customer’s current on-premise solution to ABC’s hosted environment. ABC will
also provide training to relevant Customer personnel on best practices for
efficient use of ABC’s hosted application.
ABC evaluates each of the activities it agrees to undertake as part of the
contract – that is, the set-up of the user interface, data conversion and
migration activities, and training of Customer’s personnel, and concludes the
following as to the nature of those activities (i.e. as a set-up activity or a
promised service) and accounting for the related costs:
— ABC’s set-up of the user interface is a set-up activity, rather than a
  promised service to Customer, because it provides no incremental benefit
  to Customer beyond permitting Customer to access the hosted application.
  Consequently, assuming the set-up activities are directly identifiable to the
  contract with Customer and are expected to be recoverable, ABC will
  capitalize a contract cost asset for those set-up costs.
— The data conversion and migration activities are services that will provide
  Customer with incremental benefits beyond just access to the hosted
  application. The data conversion and migration activities would otherwise
  need to be performed by Customer or another service provider and will
  permit Customer to more effectively use the hosted application to which it



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 730
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




      could be provided access without obtaining data conversion or migration
      services. Similarly, the training of Customer’s personnel is also a promised
      service because the training will permit Customer to effectively use ABC’s
      hosted application. Consistent with the conclusion in Question C280, the
      data conversion/migration and training services are distinct from the SaaS.
      Because the data conversion and migration activities and the training of
      Customer’s personnel are promised services, and assuming (as would
      typically be the case) that both of those services are satisfied over time (see
      Question F190), the costs of fulfilling those services do not qualify for
      capitalization under Subtopic 340-40 and, therefore, are expensed
      as incurred.



                   Question H235
                   If an initial contract results in a loss but there is an
                   expectation that subsequent sales will be
                   profitable, can the initial loss be capitalized?
Interpretive response: No. Sometimes an entity may offer a discounted price
on a good or service to establish or enhance a customer relationship or to
encourage future purchases. These types of arrangements could result in a loss
on the initial contract depending on what the discounted price is compared to
the cost. It is not appropriate to defer that loss based on an anticipation that
subsequent profitable contracts will be entered into with the customer.
In contrast, in some instances entities can capitalize and defer upfront
payments to customers (see Question D370).



Amortization and impairment of contract cost
assets
Overview

                  Excerpt from ASC 340-40

> Amortization and Impairment
35-1 An asset recognized in accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-1 or 340-40-
25-5 shall be amortized on a systematic basis consistent with the transfer to
the customer of the goods or services to which the asset relates. The asset
may relate to goods or services to be transferred under a specific anticipated
contract (as described in paragraph 340-40-25-5(a)).
35-2 An entity shall update the amortization to reflect a significant change in
the entity’s expected timing of transfer to the customer of the goods or
services to which the asset relates. Such a change shall be accounted for as a




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 731
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




change in accounting estimate in accordance with Subtopic 250-10 on
accounting changes and error corrections.
35-3 An entity shall recognize an impairment loss in profit or loss to the extent
that the carrying amount of an asset recognized in accordance with
paragraph 340-40-25-1 or 340-40-25-5 exceeds:
a. The amount of consideration that the entity expects to receive in the future
   and that the entity has received but has not recognized as revenue, in
   exchange for the goods or services to which the asset relates (“the
   consideration”), less
b. The costs that relate directly to providing those goods or services and that
   have not been recognized as expenses (see paragraphs 340-40-25-2 and
   340-40-25-7).
35-4 For the purposes of applying paragraph 340-40-35-3 to determine the
consideration, an entity shall use the principles for determining the transaction
price (except for the guidance in paragraphs 606-10-32-11 through 32-13 on
constraining estimates of variable consideration) and adjust that amount to
reflect the effects of the customer’s credit risk. When determining the
consideration for the purposes of paragraph 340-40-35-3, an entity also shall
consider expected contract renewals and extensions (with the same
customer).
35-5 Before an entity recognizes an impairment loss for an asset recognized in
accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-1 or 340-40-25-5, the entity shall
recognize any impairment loss for assets related to the contract that are
recognized in accordance with another Topic other than Topic 340 on other
assets and deferred costs, Topic 350 on goodwill and other intangible assets,
or Topic 360 on property, plant, and equipment (for example, Topic 330 on
inventory and Subtopic 985-20 on costs of software to be sold, leased, or
otherwise marketed). After applying the impairment test in paragraph 340-40-
35-3, an entity shall include the resulting carrying amount of the asset
recognized in accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-1 or 340-40-25-5 in the
carrying amount of the asset group or reporting unit to which it belongs for the
purpose of applying the guidance in Topics 360 and 350.
35-6 An entity shall not recognize a reversal of an impairment loss previously
recognized.


Amortization
An entity amortizes the asset recognized for the costs to obtain and/or fulfill a
contract on a systematic basis, consistent with the pattern of transfer of the
good(s) or service(s) to which the asset relates. The goods or services to which
a contract cost asset relates can include the goods or services in an existing
contract and those to be transferred under a specifically anticipated contract –
e.g. goods or services to be provided following the renewal of an
existing contract.
If a contract cost asset relates to two or more goods or services that have a
different pattern of transfer to the customer (e.g. one transferred at a point in
time and another provided over time), entities should either:




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 732
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




— allocate the contract cost asset to those multiple goods or services on a
  systematic and rational basis; or
— select a single measure that best reflects ‘use’ of the asset as the goods
  and services are transferred.
SEC guidance on income statement classification (Regulation S-X, Rule 5-03)
requires costs and expenses applicable to sales and revenues to be presented
separately from selling, general and administrative expenses. Subtopic 340-40
does not change that guidance. Therefore, the fact that Subtopic 340-40 may
require capitalization of certain contract acquisition and contract fulfillment costs
does not change the nature of those costs, and their classification in the income
statement remains the same as it would have been for similar costs that are not
capitalized. Consequently, amortization of costs to obtain a contract will
generally be classified as selling, general and administrative expense, while
amortization of costs to fulfill a contract will generally be classified as costs of
sales (revenue). Software entities will need to determine the appropriate
costs of sales (revenue) category in which to classify the fulfillment
costs amortization.

Impairment
An entity recognizes an impairment loss to the extent that the carrying amount
of the asset exceeds the recoverable amount. The ‘recoverable amount’ is
defined as the:
— expected amount of consideration to be received in the future plus any
  amounts previously received but not yet recognized as revenue in exchange
  for the goods or services to which the asset relates; less
— costs that relate directly to providing those goods or services and that have
  not been recognized as expenses.
When assessing a contract cost asset for impairment:
— the amount of consideration included in the impairment test is based on an
  estimate of the amounts that the entity expects to receive, which includes
  amounts the entity expects to receive under specifically anticipated future
  contracts (e.g. renewals of PCS, hosting services in a software licensing
  arrangement or SaaS). To estimate this amount, the entity uses the
  principles for determining the transaction price, with two key differences:
      —      it does not constrain any estimate of variable consideration – i.e. it
             includes its estimate of variable consideration (determined in
             accordance with paragraphs 606-10-32-5 through 35-9), regardless of
             whether the inclusion of this amount could result in a significant
             revenue reversal if it is adjusted; and
      —      it adjusts the amount to reflect the effects of the customer’s credit risk.
— the consideration the entity expects to receive includes both the amount of
  consideration that it has already received, but has not recognized as
  revenue, and the amount that it expects to receive in exchange for the
  goods or services to which the contract cost asset relates.
The specific contract cost asset impairment guidance in Subtopic 340-40 is
applied after any existing asset-specific impairment guidance (e.g. that in
Subtopic 985-20 pertaining to capitalized software development costs), but



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 733
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




before application of the impairment guidance applicable to long-lived
identifiable assets and goodwill.
Sequencing of impairment testing is as follows.

          Asset-specific impairment guidance (e.g. external-use software under
          Subtopic 985-20, and uncompleted internal-use software under Subtopic
   1
          350-40 – see sections 6.4.30 and 6.2.40, respectively, in KPMG
          Handbook, Software and website costs)


   2      Contract cost assets under Subtopic 340-40


   3      Long-lived identifiable assets and goodwill (Topic 350 and Topic 360)



Questions & answers

                  Question H240
                  When should capitalized cost assets be amortized
                  over a period that is longer than the specified
                  contract period – i.e. include specifically anticipated
                  renewal periods?


                  Excerpt from ASC Master Glossary

Useful Life
The period over which an asset is expected to contribute directly or indirectly
to future cash flows.

Interpretive response: As stated in the Basis for Conclusions to ASU 2014-09
(BC309), the amortization period for a contract cost asset should include
specifically anticipated renewal periods (see Question H250) when, consistent
with the concept of amortizing an asset over its ‘useful life’ under other Topics,
the entity concludes that it will continue to benefit from the contract cost asset
– i.e. in the form of the net cash flows (margin) it will earn from transferring
goods or services to the customer – over a period that is longer than the stated
contract period.
If renewals are anticipated, a contract fulfillment cost asset will generally have a
useful life that includes those anticipated renewals, while a contract acquisition
cost asset will also generally have a useful life that includes those anticipated
renewals unless the entity incurs incremental costs (e.g. pays incremental
commissions) to obtain the renewals that are ‘commensurate’ with the
incremental costs incurred (i.e. the commissions paid) to obtain the initial
contract (see Question H260).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 734
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




At the November 2016 TRG meeting, the FASB staff explained that the
amortization period for a contract cost asset is not necessarily the same as the
average customer life for the entity’s goods or services to which the contract
cost asset relates. However, the staff expressed the view that the average
customer life for those goods or services may be a reasonable application of
Subtopic 340-40 when the average customer life is not “inconsistent with the
amortization guidance in paragraph 340-40-35-1.” Based on the staff analysis
and the TRG discussion, the average customer life may be inconsistent with the
amortization guidance if the entity has a very long average customer life (e.g.
20 years), but the good or service that will be transferred to the customer has
an economic life substantially shorter than that (e.g. because the economic life
of the software being licensed, or accessed in a SaaS arrangement, is shorter
than the average customer life).



                  Example H240.1
                  Amortization period for contract cost assets
Company X enters into a one-year contract with Customer Z to provide
enterprise cloud management services through a SaaS platform for an amount
of $30 per month. Company X pays its salesperson a 5% commission (i.e. $18)
and incurs set-up costs of $150 directly related to the contract. Company X
does not pay commissions upon renewal and the set-up costs are not incurred
by Company X again if the cloud management services are renewed by the
customer. Company X’s costs of providing the services for the one-year initial
service period are $50, which is in-line with its expected costs of providing the
services in the future. Company X anticipates, based on relevant customer-
specific facts and other relevant circumstances, that Customer Z will renew the
contract for an additional three years – i.e. it expects to provide four years of
services in total.
Company X concludes that its acquisition costs ($18) and its set-up costs ($150)
are directly related to the Customer Z contract and are recoverable by the
margin it expects to earn on the contract and the specifically-anticipated
renewals. Company X further concludes that the set-up activities enhance
its resources necessary to provide the services. Therefore, Company X
capitalizes the acquisition costs and the set-up costs as contract cost
assets. Because Company X anticipates that Customer Z will enter into three
one-year renewals beyond the initial one-year contract term, and will not incur
similar costs to obtain or set up those renewals,
Company X expects to benefit from its contract acquisition and contract
fulfillment cost assets over a period that includes the initial term plus the
specifically anticipated renewal periods (i.e. four years in total). Therefore,
Company X concludes that the contract cost assets relate to the four years of
service that will be provided under the initial contract and the anticipated
renewals and will amortize those assets over the four-year period in a manner
consistent with the transfer of those services to Customer Z.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 735
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Question H250
                  When is a renewal of a good or service ‘specifically
                  anticipated’?
Interpretive response: Subtopic 340-40 does not specify how an entity should
determine whether one or more future contracts (including renewals) are
specifically anticipated, so that practice is likely to develop over time. Relevant
factors to consider may include the entity’s history with that customer (e.g. in
other contracts) and customer class, and predictive evidence derived from
substantially similar contracts. In addition, an entity should consider available
information about the market for its goods or services beyond the initial
contract term – e.g. whether it expects the service still to be in demand when
renewal would otherwise be anticipated, and expected availability of competitor
goods and services (including switching costs and other barriers to switching to
another service provider). Judgment will be involved in determining whether
renewals of goods (e.g. term licenses) or services are anticipated, but entities
should apply consistent estimates and judgments across similar contracts.



                  Example H250.1
                  Amortization of costs over specifically anticipated
                  contracts
Continuing Example H240.1, Company X expects Customer Z to renew the
initial one-year services contract for three additional years (i.e. Company X
anticipates Customer Z will be a customer for those services for four years
in total).
The four-year anticipated service period, including renewals, is based on
Company X’s experience with similar customers in the same market – i.e.
Company X considers that customers such as Customer Z generally incur a
significant cost and effort to change cloud management service solutions such
that most customers renew their contracts multiple times after the initial
service period. However, because technology is continuing to evolve in this
space, Company X has observed that many customers migrate to a new service
offering (which does not include upgrades that one would expect to see
implemented over a multi-year period) after four years, whether one provided
by Company X (for which Company X would generally incur additional set-up
and acquisition costs) or by another cloud service provider.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 736
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Question H260
                  When is a commission paid for the renewal of a
                  good (e.g. a term license) or service ‘commensurate
                  with’ a commission paid on the initial good or
                  service?
Interpretive response: Software entities, whether providing on-premise
software or SaaS, frequently pay commissions to salespeople or third parties
for both initial contracts (e.g. an initial one-year SaaS arrangement or three-year
term license) and renewal contracts (e.g. renewals of those initial SaaS
arrangements or term licenses). It is also common for the commissions paid for
the initial contract to be substantially greater in amount than commissions paid
for a renewal contract (e.g. the entity may pay a commission of 5% of the total
contract value for an initial contract and only 1% of the total contract value for a
renewal of the same license or service). Consequently, the question arose as to
whether that difference in commission amounts between the initial contract
and the renewal contract automatically meant that the renewal commission
was not ‘commensurate with’ the initial commission.
Stakeholders raised questions about the evaluation of whether a renewal
commission is commensurate with an initial commission should focus on the
commission amount in comparison to the expected contract value or on the
comparative ‘level of effort’ expended by the employee or third party to which
the entity pays the commission.
At the November 2016 TRG meeting (TRG Agenda Papers Nos. 57 and 60), the
FASB staff stated, and TRG members generally agreed, that the evaluation of
whether a renewal commission is ‘commensurate with’ an initial commission
should not consider the comparative ‘level of effort’ expended by the employee
or third party to which the entity pays the commission. Rather, when making
the ‘commensurate’ evaluation, an entity should consider whether the
economic benefits it expects to obtain from payment of the commission (i.e.
the margin it expects to earn from providing the good or service) is
commensurate with the commission paid. Therefore, in a situation where the
expected economic benefits an entity expects to obtain from providing services
(e.g. SaaS) during a renewal period are commensurate with the economic
benefits the entity expects to obtain from providing those same services during
the initial period, the renewal and initial commissions that will be paid must be
roughly equal to be considered ‘commensurate’ with each other. Entities do
not, in general, pay substantially different amounts for the same asset (i.e. the
same economic benefits). Therefore, a substantively larger initial contract
commission represents, both practically and conceptually, a prepayment for the
economic benefits that the entity anticipates receiving from the renewal
contracts, justifying an amortization period for the initial contract acquisition
cost asset that includes the renewal periods.
Consequently, in the common scenario where an entity pays significantly larger
commissions for initial contracts than for renewal contracts, those lower
renewal commissions are considered to be ‘commensurate with’ the higher
initial contract commissions only if the economic benefits the entity will derive
(i.e. the margin it will earn) from the initial contract significantly exceeds those it
expects to derive from the renewal contracts.



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 737
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Example H260.1
                  Whether a commission paid for a renewal is
                  ‘commensurate’
A cloud service provider (CSP) provides SaaS to its customers. The SaaS is
generally sold with a one year-term, with multiple options to renew the services
annually after each one-year term expires. CSP has a compensation plan that
pays its sales staff commissions for obtaining and renewing contracts. Under
this plan, a sales person receives a 5% commission on any initial contract that
is obtained and a 1% commission on renewal contracts that are obtained. The
sales personnel that obtain, and are paid commissions on, the initial contract are
different personnel from those that obtain, and are paid commissions on, the
renewal contracts because CSP has different sales departments responsible for
obtaining new customers and for renewal efforts. In determining commission
rates to be paid on obtaining initial and renewal contracts, CSP factors in the
effort necessary to secure the initial and renewal contracts by the applicable
sales team and the average annual compensation that the sales personnel (both
initial and renewal team) should receive, among other factors.
Obtaining an initial contract generally requires a significant amount of effort
from the sales staff. The sales effort can vary from prospective customer to
customer, but generally requires several hours (spanning over several months).
There is generally significantly less effort required in order to secure the
renewal, which may only involve making a few phone calls or sending an email
to confirm the customer wants to renew. CSP has a low attrition rate –
historically greater than 90% of all one-year SaaS contracts are renewed for at
least two additional years. The low attrition rate is, in part, a result of the
significant level of data input, integration with existing systems and employee
training that is necessary in order for CSP’s customers to fully use the SaaS.
CSP agrees to provide SaaS for a term of one-year to Customer for $100,000.
Customer has the option to renew the SaaS at the end of each year for
$100,000 per year. Based on its compensation plan, CSP pays the sales person
$5,000 for obtaining the initial contract, and will pay $1,000 to the different
sales person that obtains each renewal contract.
CSP determines that the $5,000 paid to the sales person that obtained the initial
SaaS contract should be capitalized as it is an incremental cost of obtaining a
contract in accordance with paragraph 340-40-25-1. CSP also determines that
any renewal commissions paid should also be capitalized when/if incurred as
incremental costs of obtaining that (those) contract(s) – i.e. even though the
renewal commissions would be eligible for the practical expedient (see
Question H150), assume CSP has not elected the practical expedient.
The following are the relevant economics of the arrangement under three
different scenarios. Under each scenario, the revenues that will be earned by
CSP are the same, as are the commissions paid to CSP’s salespeople. The only
difference is in CSP’s costs to provide the SaaS and, consequently, the gross
margin CSP will earn from the initial versus the renewal contracts.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                  738
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




Scenario 1

                                                                          Initial             Expected             Expected
                                                                        contract             renewal 1            renewal 2
 Revenue                                                               $100,000               $100,000             $100,000
 Cost of services                                                         (30,000)               (30,000)             (30,000)
 Gross margin (exclusive of
 commission costs)                                                     $ 70,000               $ 70,000             $ 70,000
 Commission paid                                                       $ (5,000)              $ (1,000)            $ (1,000)

Scenario 2

                                                                          Initial            Expected              Expected
                                                                        contract            renewal 1             renewal 2
 Revenue                                                               $100,000               $100,000             $100,000
 Cost of services                                                         (10,000)               (50,000)             (50,000)
 Gross margin (exclusive of
 commission costs)                                                     $ 90,000               $ 50,000             $ 50,000
 Commission paid                                                       $ (5,000)              $ (1,000)            $ (1,000)

Scenario 3

                                                                          Initial            Expected              Expected
                                                                        contract            renewal 1             renewal 2
 Revenue                                                               $100,000               $100,000             $100,000
 Cost of services                                                         (42,000)               (30,000)             (30,000)
 Gross margin (exclusive of
 commission costs)                                                     $ 58,000                $ 70,000             $ 70,000
 Commission paid                                                       $ (5,000)               $ (1,000)            $ (1,000)

In Scenarios 1 and 3, the renewal commission is not ‘commensurate with’ the
initial commission. This is because the commission paid is five times greater
than the renewal commissions that will be paid, but the economic benefits (i.e.
the margin) the entity expects to obtain from the renewal contracts are equal
(Scenario 1) or greater (Scenario 3) than the economic benefits the entity
expects to obtain from the initial contract. Therefore, the substantially greater
initial contract commission is a partial prepayment for the economic benefits
CSP specifically anticipates receiving from the renewal periods.
In Scenario 2, the economic benefits CSP will derive (i.e. the margin it will earn)
from the initial contract significantly exceed those it expects to derive from the
renewal contracts. Consequently, the commissions to be paid for each of the
three contracts (i.e. initial contract and two renewals) are commensurate with
each other. This scenario is presented to illustrate the notion of
‘commensurate’; however, we would expect this scenario to be rare in practice.
The amortization of the 5% initial commission that results in each scenario
presented above is addressed in Question H270.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 739
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Question H270
                  If the amortization period for a contract acquisition
                  cost asset includes specifically anticipated renewal
                  periods, should the entire asset be amortized over
                  that period or only the amount that is incremental
                  to the commission the entity will pay for the
                  renewal?
Interpretive response: We believe either approach could be acceptable
provided it was applied consistently to substantially similar circumstances. To
illustrate the effect of this conclusion, we can consider this conclusion in
relationship to Example H260.1 in Question H260.
As illustrated in Example H260.1, entities will frequently pay commissions for
initial contracts that are significantly greater than the commissions they will pay
for contract renewals. In Example H260.1, the entity (CSP) pays a 5%
commission for the initial contract and only a 1% commission for each renewal
of that contract.
In Scenario 2 (which is likely to be an uncommon scenario), where the 1%
renewal commission is determined to be ‘commensurate’ with the initial 5%
commission, the amortization period for the 5% initial contract commission
does not include the two specifically anticipated one-year renewal periods.
Consequently, the 5% initial contract commission is amortized in its entirety
over the initial one-year contract term consistent with the CSP’s provision of the
cloud-based services to its customers.
In Scenarios 1 and 3, the amortization period for the initial contract acquisition
cost asset includes the two specifically anticipated one-year renewal periods
because the 1% renewal commission is not ‘commensurate with’ the 5% initial
contract commission. Consequently, we believe CSP could either (and disclose
its policy in this regard):
— amortize the entire 5% initial contract commission over the initial contract
  period plus the two specifically anticipated renewal periods, which,
  assuming a time-elapsed or time-based measure of progress for the SaaS,
  would result in recognizing more sales expense during the two renewal
  periods. That is, during each of the two renewal periods, CSP will, in
  addition to amortizing the initial contract commission asset, also be
  amortizing the 1% renewal commission (unless CSP is permitted, and
  chooses, to elect the practical expedient for the renewal commissions); or
— amortize only the portion of the initial contract commission that is
  determined to be ‘incremental’ to the renewal commission over the initial
  contract period plus the two specifically anticipated renewal periods, while
  recognizing the remainder of the initial contract commission over only the
  initial one-year contract period (Note: it would not be permissible to apply
  the one-year practical expedient to that portion of the overall initial
  commission). Applied to Scenarios 1 and 3, this would result in recognizing
  equal contract cost amortization (i.e. sales expense) during the initial and
  the two anticipated renewal periods (i.e. assuming CSP uses a time-elapsed
  or time-based measure of progress for the SaaS and CSP is not permitted




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 740
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




      to apply, or does not elect, the practical expedient for the renewal
      commissions).
We believe an entity’s decision in this regard is an accounting policy election
that should be disclosed in accordance with paragraph 340-40-50-2.
Example H300.1 illustrates an application of both of the above approaches.



                  Question H280
                  Can a contract cost asset be allocated solely to a
                  good or service (or bundle of goods and services)
                  that is not distinct?
Interpretive response: No. We do not believe an entity can allocate a contract
cost asset to a good or service (or bundle of goods and services) if that good or
service (or bundle) is not distinct. If a good or service (or bundle of goods and
services) is not distinct from the other goods or services in the contract, the
economic benefits and costs associated to that good or service are not
separately identifiable from the economic benefits and costs of the other goods
and services from which it is not distinct. Consequently, amortization of a
contract cost asset should be on a systematic basis based on the expected
attribution of the distinct goods or services (which may include a bundle of
goods or services, or distinct goods or services that are part of a single
performance obligation in accordance with the series guidance in
paragraph 606-10-25-14(b)) to which it relates (which may include distinct,
anticipated goods or services), only. If the distinct good or service to which the
(or a portion of the) contract cost asset relates is transferred to the customer
over time, the entity must use a single measure of progress to amortize the
contract cost asset that is consistent with its single measure of progress used
to recognize revenue on the related performance obligation.



                  Question H290
                  If a contract cost asset relates to more than one
                  distinct good or service, is the entity required to
                  allocate that asset among those distinct goods or
                  services?
Interpretive response: No. While it is always acceptable to allocate a contract
cost asset among the distinct goods or services to which it relates (see
Question H300), the members of the TRG generally concluded that it would
also be reasonable to amortize a contract cost asset using a single measure of
progress considering all of the distinct goods or services to which the asset
relates.
In the view of most TRG members, this approach may be more operable for
some entities since it would not require the entity to undertake an allocation
exercise for contract costs within a contract. In TRG agenda paper No. 23
outlining this view, the FASB and IASB staffs expressed that (1) they did not
believe this approach should result in a significantly different pattern of



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 741
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




amortization of the contract cost asset from that which would result from
allocating the asset to all of the distinct goods or services to which it relates and
(2) that use of the ‘single measure’ approach would not change an entity’s
requirement to consider anticipated future contracts (e.g. contract renewals)
when determining the goods or services to which the contract cost asset
relates (i.e. the amortization period for the asset).
When determining a single measure of progress to apply to amortization of a
contract cost asset, we believe entities would look to the guidance in Topic 606
for determining an appropriate measure of progress to apply to a performance
obligation satisfied over time (paragraphs 606-10-25-31 through 25-37 and
paragraphs 606-10-55-16 through 55-21), which is discussed in Chapter F –
Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance
obligation. A measure of progress that would not be acceptable for recognizing
revenue on the goods or services to which the asset relates if they were a
single performance obligation also would not be acceptable in amortizing a
contract cost asset. Consistent with determining a single measure of progress
for a combined performance obligation satisfied over time, determining a single
measure of progress for a contract cost asset that relates to multiple goods or
services (whether those goods or services are a single performance obligation
or separate performance obligations) may require significant judgment and
there may be more than one acceptable measure of progress that could
be selected.
We would expect an entity to either allocate contract cost assets among the
distinct goods or services (or bundles of distinct goods or services) to which
they relate or use a single measure of progress approach consistently in similar
circumstances.



                   Question H295
                   If an entity uses the single measure of progress
                   approach to amortize contract cost assets that
                   relate to multiple distinct goods or services, would
                   straight-line amortization be appropriate?
Interpretive response: It depends. As discussed in Question H290, an entity is
not required to allocate contract cost assets to each distinct good or service to
which they relate. However, if the entity does not allocate a contract cost asset
to each distinct good or service to which it relates, it nonetheless uses a single
measure of progress that is consistent with the transfer to the customer of the
goods or services to which the contract cost asset relates. [340-40-35-1]
For example, if a significant amount of revenue and/or margin will be recognized
at or near contract inception, we believe the amortization approach should also
recognize a commensurate portion of the cost upfront. That is, it is
inappropriate not to recognize expense upfront when a significant portion of the
economic benefits expected to be derived from the contract cost asset are
recognized upfront (e.g. a time-based amortization method would be
inappropriate).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 742
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                   Example H295.1
                   Allocation and amortization of contract cost
                   assets (1)
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with Customer to provide a two-year license to
Customer for its off-the-shelf software (Product H) and to provide technical
support services and updates, upgrades and enhancements developed for the
two-year term (collectively, PCS). The total, fixed transaction price is $100,000.
ABC pays a commission of $20,000 to its salesperson for obtaining the contract
(assume no renewals are expected).
The PCS is determined to be a single performance obligation (see
Question C150). The software license and PCS are determined to be separate
performance obligations (see Questions C160 and C170). The software license
is transferred to Customer at contract inception, and the PCS has a two-year
term commencing on transfer of control of the license. Additionally:
— The relative stand-alone selling prices of the Product H software license and
  the PCS are $80,000 (80% of transaction price) and $20,000 (20% of
  transaction price), respectively.
— The gross margin ABC expects to earn on the software license is $76,000,
  and ABC expects to earn a margin of $8,000 each year on the PCS.
ABC has elected to not allocate contract cost assets to the separate
performance obligations in arrangements of this nature. Instead, ABC will
amortize the contract cost asset using one measure for the transfer of the
goods or services to which the contract cost asset relates. In considering
whether an output or input method best achieves this objective, ABC concludes
that an output-based method will result in the most faithful depiction of its
realization of the expected economic benefits from the contract cost asset. An
input-based method would not meet this objective because the incremental
cost to transfer the Product H license is virtually nil.
On transfer of control of the Product H license, ABC amortizes $16,000 of the
$20,000 initial contract cost asset. $16,000 is 80% of the contract cost asset
($16,000/$20,000 = 80%), which is equal to the percentage of the transaction
price allocated to the Product H license ($80,000/$100,000 = 80%). ABC
concludes that the relative stand-alone selling price is a reasonably faithful
depiction of the value to Customer of the Product H license relative to the PCS.
The remaining balance of the contract cost asset of $4,000 will be amortized
over the two-year PCS period on a time-elapsed output basis. Time elapsed
faithfully depicts the value to the customer of the PCS services over the
two-year PCS period.
Other measures may also be acceptable provided that they result in
amortization of the contract cost asset that is generally consistent with the
pattern of transfer to the customer of the goods or services to which the asset
relates. For example, ABC could amortize the contract cost asset in proportion
to the gross margin to be recognized.
It would not be appropriate in this example for ABC to amortize the entire
contract cost asset on a straight-line basis, i.e. using a time-based or time-
elapsed measure over the two-year PCS period (e.g. $10,000 per year) without
amortizing a significant portion of the contract cost asset upfront, because the



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 743
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




resulting recognition of expense would not be consistent with the transfer to
the customer of the goods or services to which it relates.



                  Question H300
                  What approaches are acceptable for allocating a
                  contract cost asset to the distinct goods or services
                  to which it relates?
Interpretive response: Subtopic 340-40 (paragraph 340-40-35-1) requires a
contract cost asset to be amortized on a systematic basis (which is not
necessarily on a straight-line basis) that is ‘consistent with the transfer to the
customer of the goods or services to which the asset relates’. As outlined in
Question H290, this may be accomplished by allocating the contract cost asset
among the distinct goods or services to which it relates or by applying a single
measure of amortization considering the pattern of transfer of all of the distinct
goods or services to which the asset relates.
If an entity chooses to allocate a contract cost asset, there may be multiple
acceptable approaches to doing so. This is because the amortization guidance in
Subtopic 340-40 is not specific in this respect. However, whatever approach is
used should be applied consistently to similar circumstances.
Relative stand-alone selling price approach
An entity would generally be permitted to allocate a contract cost asset on a
relative stand-alone selling price basis. If there are not specifically anticipated
renewals (see Question H250), the relative allocation of the contract cost asset
would follow the allocation of the transaction price to the performance
obligations (or distinct goods or services) in the contract.
However, additional complexity will arise if renewals of a good or service are
specifically-anticipated and the entity does not pay commissions on contract
renewals that are ‘commensurate’ with the commissions it pays on initial
contracts (see Question H260). This is because the goods or services to
which the contract commission being evaluated relates include those
anticipated renewals.
So, for example, assume an entity enters into a contract for a perpetual
software license and one year of bundled PCS. The entity anticipates the
customer will renew PCS for three additional annual periods, but does not pay a
commission for PCS renewals. In that case, the entity will allocate the initial
contract commission asset to the software license and four annual PCS periods
on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. If the entity pays a non-
commensurate commission for PCS renewals, those expected renewal
commissions are factored into the allocation of the initial contract commission
asset. Example H300.1 illustrates this scenario (Alternative 1).
Alternative approaches
The following represent alternative approaches we believe could be acceptable
depending on the facts and circumstances (not necessarily all-inclusive):




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 744
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




— Economic benefits based allocation – Rather than allocating a contract
  cost asset to distinct goods or services on the basis of their stand-alone
  selling price, it may be appropriate to consider the economic benefits (e.g.
  the margin) the entity expects to obtain from transferring the good or
  service. For example, two goods or services may have equal stand-alone
  selling prices, but very different margins, and given that an entity
  generally pays a commission in order to obtain future economic benefits
  in the form of the margin it earns from providing the goods or services to
  which the commission relates, we would generally view it as reasonable
  to allocate the commission in that case to the related goods or services
  on a relative margin basis. Consistent with the relative stand-alone selling
  price approach, the entity would factor margin that will be earned from
  specifically anticipated renewals for which commensurate commissions
  are not paid into the allocation approach. This approach is illustrated by
  Alternative 2 in Example H300.1.
— Specific allocation basis – There may be circumstances in which an entity
  can objectively determine that a contract cost asset, whether a fulfillment
  cost or an acquisition cost, relates specifically to one or more distinct goods
  or services in a contract, but not all. In that case, it may be reasonable to
  allocate the contract cost asset entirely to that (or those) distinct goods or
  services. The evaluation of whether a contract cost relates specifically to a
  distinct good(s) or service(s) might be similar to that an entity undertakes in
  determining if a variable payment relates specifically to the entity’s efforts
  to satisfy a performance obligation or transfer a distinct good or service as
  described in paragraph 606-10-32-40(a). Chapter E – Step 4: Allocate the
  transaction price to performance obligations in the contract includes
  discussion of the guidance in paragraph 606-10-32-40.



                  Example H300.1
                  Allocation and amortization of contract cost
                  assets (2)
ABC Corp. enters into a contract with XYZ, Inc. (XYZ) to license its software on a
perpetual basis. ABC also agrees to provide technical support and unspecified
updates/upgrades for two years. Those services auto-renew on an annual basis
after the initial two-year term. The total, fixed transaction price is $280,000.
Assume that the technical support and unspecified update/upgrade rights are
determined to be a single PCS performance obligation (see Question C150). ABC
pays a commission of $28,000 to its sales person for obtaining the contract.
Customers generally incur a significant cost and effort to change software
solutions and generally maintain PCS for at least five years. Consequently,
ABC anticipates XYZ will renew PCS for three additional years after the initial
two-year PCS period. ABC sales personnel are paid a commission for obtaining
a PCS renewal of 2% of the renewal fees.
The license and PCS are determined to be separate performance obligations.
ABC has determined that the software license represents a license to functional
IP. The license is transferred to the customer at contract inception and the




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                  745
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




two-year PCS term commences upon transfer of control of the license. In
addition, the following facts are relevant:
— The relative stand-alone selling prices of the license and the initial two-year
  PCS are $200,000 and $80,000, respectively.
— The contractual fee for each anticipated PCS renewal is $40,000.
— The margin ABC expects to earn on the license is $180,000, while ABC
  expects to earn a margin of $24,000 each year that it provides PCS.
Assume there is no ‘significant change in the entity’s expected timing of
transfer to the customer of the goods or services to which the asset relates’ –
i.e. XYZ renews PCS as anticipated and does not elect to renew PCS at the end
of Year 5.
Alternative 1 – ABC elects to allocate the capitalized contract cost asset on a
relative stand-alone selling price basis. Looking solely to the relative stand-alone
selling prices of the license and two years of PCS in the enforceable contract,
$20,000 of the capitalized contract cost asset would be allocated to the license
and $8,000 would be allocated to the PCS. However, because the benefits (i.e.
margin) ABC will earn from each year of promised and anticipated PCS are the
same, the $800 commission that to be paid on each of the anticipated PCS
renewals is not commensurate with the commission for the initial, promised
two-year PCS.
Consequently, ABC aggregates the initial commission of $28,000 and the
expected renewal commissions of $2,400 ($800 for each of the three
anticipated annual renewals) and allocates them on the following basis to the
license and the expected PCS.

                                                                   Relative                                 Allocation of
                                                              stand-alone                       %               expected
 Good or service                                              selling price             allocation          commissions
 License                                                           $200,000                      50%                 $15,200
 2-year initial PCS                                                    80,000                    20%                     6,080
 Year 3 renewal PCS                                                    40,000                    10%                     3,040
 Year 4 renewal PCS                                                    40,000                    10%                     3,040
 Year 5 renewal PCS                                                    40,000                    10%                     3,040
                                                                   $400,000                    100%                  $30,400

At contract inception, ABC becomes obligated to pay a commission of $28,000.
Because control of the software license transfers to XYZ at contract inception,
ABC expenses $15,200 of the $28,000 commission cost, and recognizes a
contract cost asset of $12,800. ABC amortizes $6,080 of that contract cost
asset to sales expense over the two-year initial PCS term, leaving a remaining
balance of $6,720 at the end of Year 2. At the beginning of each of Years 3
through 5, ABC adds to the contract cost asset by $800 (for each PCS renewal
commission), while amortizing $3,040 of that contract cost asset to sales
expense during each of those years.
Alternative 1(a) – The conclusion in Question H270 permits a variation of the
accounting outlined in the preceding paragraph. Following the discussion in that
question, it would also be permissible for ABC to amortize the initial contract
cost asset of $12,800 ($28,000 commission – $15,200 allocated to the software



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                  746
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




license) over the expected 5-year PCS term ($2,560 per year). This would result
in ABC recognizing $2,560 in amortized sales expense in each of Years 1 and 2,
but recognizing $3,360 of such expense in each of Years 3-5 ($2,560 + $800
= $3,360).
Alternative 2 – ABC elects to allocate the capitalized contract cost asset on a
relative margin basis. Consistent with Alternative 1, ABC concludes that the
$800 commission that will be paid on each of the anticipated PCS renewals is
not commensurate with the commission for the initial, promised two-year PCS.
Consequently, ABC aggregates the initial commission of $28,000 and the
expected renewal commissions of $2,400 ($800 for each of the three
anticipated annual renewals) and allocates them on the following basis to the
license and the expected PCS.

                                                                                                            Allocation of
                                                                    Relative                    %               expected
 Good or service                                                     margin             allocation          commissions
 License                                                           $180,000                      60%                 $18,240
 2-year initial PCS                                                    48,000                    16%                     4,864
 Year 3 renewal PCS                                                    24,000                      8%                    2,432
 Year 4 renewal PCS                                                    24,000                      8%                    2,432
 Year 5 renewal PCS                                                    24,000                      8%                    2,432
                                                                   $300,000                    100%                  $30,400

At contract inception, ABC becomes obligated to pay a commission of $28,000.
Because control of the software license transfers to XYZ at contract inception,
ABC expenses $18,240 of the $28,000 commission cost, and recognizes a
contract cost asset of $9,760 ($28,000 commission – $18,240 allocated to the
software license). ABC amortizes $4,864 of that contract cost asset to sales
expense over the two-year initial PCS term, leaving a remaining balance of
$4,896 at the end of Year 2. At the beginning of each of Years 3 through 5, ABC
adds to the contract cost asset by $800 (for each PCS renewal commission),
while amortizing $2,432 of that contract cost asset to sales expense each of
those years.
Alternative 2(a) – Consistent with Alternative 1(a), a variation of the accounting
outlined in the preceding paragraph would be for ABC to amortize the initial
contract cost asset of $9,760 over the expected 5-year PCS term ($1,952 per
year). This would result in ABC recognizing $1,952 in amortized sales expense
in each of Years 1 and 2, but recognizing $2,752 of such expense in each of
Years 3-5 (i.e. $1,952 + the $800 commission specific to that year’s PCS
renewal = $2,752).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 747
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                  Question H310
                  Is a contract cost asset amortized consistent with
                  the expected pattern of transfer of the related good
                  or service or the expected pattern of revenue
                  recognition?
Interpretive response: Subtopic 340-40 prescribes that a contract cost asset
be amortized on a systematic basis consistent with the transfer to the customer
of the goods or services to which the asset relates. The expected pattern of
revenue recognition for a good or service, which may differ from the pattern of
transfer to the customer of that good or service if the consideration to which
the entity expects to be entitled is variable, does not affect the amortization of a
contract cost asset. By way of example, assume a software entity agrees to
transfer a distinct software license in exchange for a sales- or usage-based
royalty. The portion of any contract cost asset that relates to the distinct
software license should be fully expensed upon transfer of control of that
license, without regard to when the entity expects to be able to recognize
expected sales- or usage-based royalties.
It is important to remember, however, that a portion of the total contract cost
asset in the preceding example may relate to other promised goods or services
(e.g. PCS or hosting services), including goods or services that will be provided
under one or more specifically anticipated contracts (e.g. expected PCS or
hosting services renewals). Unless a single measure of progress approach is
used for amortization of the contract cost asset (see Question H290) only the
portion of the contract cost asset that relates to the distinct software license is
expensed upon transfer of control of that license; the remainder is amortized
consistent with the transfer of the other goods or services to which it relates.



                  Question H320
                  Are sales- and usage-based royalties included in
                  ‘the consideration’ (paragraph 340-40-35-3(a)) when
                  considering contract cost asset impairment?
Interpretive response: Yes, ‘the consideration’ in paragraph 340-40-35-3(a)
includes the entity’s unconstrained estimate (based on paragraphs 606-10-32-5
through 32-9) of all variable consideration, including sales- and usage-based
royalties, to which it expects to be entitled, reduced for any such amounts it
does not expect to receive (i.e. collect) from the customer.
In some circumstances (e.g. where the license is not distinct or is not
transferred at the beginning of the contract, and a significant portion of the
contract fees are in the form of a sales- or usage-based royalty) this may require
an entity to estimate expected sales- or usage-based royalties to assess
impairment of a contract cost asset when it otherwise would not be required to
estimate those amounts for purposes of revenue recognition or disclosure
purposes (e.g. if the entity must apply the guidance on allocation of variable
consideration or is able to apply the ‘as-invoiced’ recognition practical expedient
in paragraph 606-10-55-18).



© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 748
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                   Question H330
                   Is the amortization period and pattern for contract
                   cost assets and the revenue recognition pattern for
                   nonrefundable upfront fees symmetrical?
Interpretive response: No. The amortization period and the amortization
pattern for contract cost assets and the revenue recognition pattern for
nonrefundable upfront fees are not symmetrical under Subtopic 340-40 and
Topic 606.
The revenue recognition pattern for nonrefundable upfront fees is based on the
existing contract plus any renewals for which the initial payment of the upfront
fee provides a material right to the customer. Therefore, the recognition period
and recognition pattern for these items may not align, even if the contract cost
asset and nonrefundable upfront fees are related to the same contract.
[606-10-55-50 – 55-53]




                   Comparison to legacy US GAAP
                   Amortization of contract fulfillment costs decoupled
                   from nonrefundable upfront fees
Legacy SEC guidance on revenue recognition required registrants to defer
nonrefundable upfront fees if they were not in exchange for goods or services
performed that represented the culmination of a separate earnings process.
These fees were deferred and recognized as revenue over the expected period
of performance, which may have included expected renewal periods if the
expected life of the contract extended beyond the initial period. Similarly, the
guidance allowed an entity to elect an accounting policy of deferring certain set-
up costs or customer acquisition costs. [SAB Topic 13]
If the amount of deferred upfront fees exceeded the deferred costs, then these
two amounts were recognized over the same period and in the same manner.
However, if the amount of deferred costs exceeded the deferred revenue from
upfront fees, then legacy practice was somewhat mixed and some entities
amortized the net deferred costs over the shorter of the estimated customer
life and the stated contract period. [SAB Topic 13]
Topic 606 and Subtopic 340-40 effectively decouples the amortization of
contract fulfillment costs from that for any nonrefundable upfront fees in the
contract. The capitalization of qualifying fulfillment costs is not a policy election.
The amortization period for contract cost assets is determined in a manner
substantially similar to that under the legacy guidance when upfront fees result
in an equal or greater amount of deferred revenue – i.e. the existing contract
plus anticipated renewals that the entity can specifically identify. However,
contract costs that were previously deferred without corresponding deferred
revenue may be amortized over a longer period under Subtopic 340-40 than
under legacy US GAAP.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 749
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




                   Question H340
                   Are the remaining estimated contract costs used in
                   the impairment assessment discounted?
Interpretive response: Possibly, in some cases. For certain long-term contracts
that have a significant financing component, the estimated transaction price
may be discounted (see Chapter D – Step 3: Determine the transaction price;
The existence of a significant financing component in the contract).
Topic 606 does not prescribe whether to discount the estimated remaining
costs of directly providing those goods or services when performing the
impairment test. Even though the contract cost asset is not presented on a
discounted basis in the entity’s balance sheet, an entity’s decision about
whether to discount estimated remaining costs of providing the goods or
services should be consistent with the measurement of the remaining
transaction price.



                   Question H350
                   How often does an entity assess its contract cost
                   assets for impairment?
Interpretive response: Subtopic 340-40 does not specify how often an entity
should assess its contract cost assets for impairment. We believe, similar to
assessing impairment of long-lived assets under Section 360-10-35, entities
should assess the contract cost assets for impairment whenever events or
changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a contract cost
asset may not be recoverable.
Such events or changes in circumstances may include the following:
— contract modifications, including changes in price, contract terminations,
  and scope changes;
— changes in expectations as to whether customers will renew/extend
  existing contracts, or specific goods or services in a contract, to which
  contract cost assets relate;
— changes in estimates of expected costs to fulfill one or more performance
  obligations in a contract; and/or
— changes in estimates of the amount of consideration that the entity expects
  to receive from the customer (e.g. collectibility).



                  Example H350.1
                  Impairment of a contract cost asset
SaaS Provider enters into a contract to provide Customer with access to its
SaaS for three years in exchange for $200,000 per year. SaaS provider incurs
$100,000 in incremental costs to obtain the contract and $80,000 in costs for
customer-specific set up activities to fulfill the contract. The $180,000 of costs




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 750
                                                                                               H. Contract costs




are capitalized and are being amortized over the three-year period which
Customer will benefit.
At the end of Year 2, Customer approaches SaaS provider to renegotiate the
fee, because of significant economic hardships faced by Customer. SaaS
provider agrees to reduce the fee for Year 3 to $25,000 and is assessing the
unamortized contract cost asset of $60,000 ($180,000 less two years of
amortization, or $120,000) for impairment.
Assuming no other contract cost impairment guidance outside of Subtopic 340-
40 is applicable and $15,000 of costs related to providing the final year of SaaS
access, SaaS Provider impairs the contract cost asset by $50,000. This
represents the difference between consideration that it expects to receive less
the costs that relate directly to providing those services ($25,000 consideration
less $15,000 of costs) and the unamortized contract cost asset balance
($60,000).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 751
                                                                                         Some basic reminders




Some basic reminders
   Scope


   The guidance applies                         Topic 606 applies to contracts to deliver goods
   to all contracts with                        or services to a customer. A ‘customer’ is a
   customers unless the                         party that has contracted with an entity to obtain
   customer contract is                         goods or services that are an output of the
   specifically in the                          entity’s ordinary activities in exchange for
   scope of other                               consideration.
   guidance – e.g.
                                                Topic 606 will be applied to part of a contract
   Topic 944 (insurance),
                                                when only some elements are in the scope of
   Topic 460
                                                other guidance.
   (guarantees).



                          Step 1: Identify the contract



   Contracts can be                             A contract with a customer is in the scope of
   written, oral or                             Topic 606 when the contract is legally
   implied by an entity’s                       enforceable and all of the following criteria are
   customary business                           met:
   practices, but must
                                                — the contract has commercial substance;
   be enforceable by
                                                — rights to goods or services can be identified;
   law.
                                                — payment terms can be identified;
   This may require legal                       — the consideration the entity expects to be
   analysis on a                                  entitled to is probable of collection; and
   jurisdictional level to                      — the contract is approved and the parties are
   determine when a                               committed to their obligations.
   contract exists and
   the terms of that                            If the criteria are not met, any consideration
   contract’s                                   received from the customer is generally
   enforceability.                              recognized as a deposit (liability).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 752
                                                                                         Some basic reminders




                    Step 2: Identify the performance obligations


   Performance                                  Performance obligations are the unit of account
   obligations do not                           under Topic 606 and generally represent the
   have to be legally                           distinct goods or services that are promised to
   enforceable; they                            the customer.
   exist if the customer
                                                Promises to the customer are separated into
   has a reasonable
                                                performance obligations, and are accounted for
   expectation that the
                                                separately if they are both (1) capable of being
   good or service will
                                                distinct and (2) distinct in the context of the
   be provided.
                                                contract.
   A promise can be
   implied by customary                         If the distinct goods or services are substantially
   business practices,                          the same and have the same pattern of transfer
   policies or                                  to the customer over time, they are combined
   statements.                                  into a single performance obligation (a ‘series’).




                   Step 3: Determine the transaction price


   Estimating variable                          The transaction price is the amount of
   consideration is a                           consideration to which an entity expects to be
   significant judgment                         entitled in exchange for transferring goods or
   for many entities.                           services to a customer, excluding amounts
                                                collected on behalf of third parties – e.g. some
   When determining
                                                sales taxes. This consideration can include fixed
   the transaction price,
                                                and variable amounts.
   an entity uses the
   legally enforceable                          The transaction price determination also
   contract term. It does                       considers:
   not take into
                                                — Variable consideration, which is estimated
   consideration the
                                                  at contract inception and is updated at each
   possibility of a
                                                  reporting date for any changes in
   contract being
                                                  circumstances. The amount of estimated
   canceled, renewed
                                                  variable consideration included in the
   or modified.
                                                  transaction price is constrained to the
                                                  amount for which it is probable that a
                                                  significant reversal in the amount of
                                                  cumulative revenue recognized will not
                                                  occur when the uncertainty is resolved.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 753
                                                                                         Some basic reminders




                                                — Noncash consideration received from a
                                                  customer is measured at fair value at
                                                  contract inception.
                                                — Consideration payable to a customer,
                                                  which represents a reduction of the
                                                  transaction price unless it is a payment for
                                                  distinct goods or services it receives from
                                                  the customer.
                                                — Significant financing components, which
                                                  may exist in a contract when payment is
                                                  received significantly before or after the
                                                  transfer of goods or services. This could
                                                  result in an adjustment to the transaction
                                                  price to impute interest income/expense.




                    Step 4: Allocate the transaction price



   A contractually stated                       The transaction price is allocated at contract
   price or list price is                       inception to each performance obligation to
   not presumed to be                           depict the amount of consideration to which an
   the stand-alone                              entity expects to be entitled in exchange for
   selling price of that                        transferring the promised goods or services to
   good or service.                             the customer.
                                                An entity generally allocates the transaction
                                                price to each performance obligation in
                                                proportion to its stand-alone selling price.
                                                However, when specified criteria are met, a
                                                discount or variable consideration is allocated to
                                                one or more, but not all, performance
                                                obligations.
                                                The stand-alone selling price is the price at
                                                which an entity would sell a promised good or
                                                service separately to a customer. Observable
                                                stand-alone prices are used when they are
                                                available. If not available, an entity is required
                                                to estimate the price using other techniques
                                                and maximizing the use of observable inputs –
                                                even if the entity never sells the performance
                                                obligation separately.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 754
                                                                                         Some basic reminders




               Step 5: Recognize revenue



   An entity first                              An entity recognizes revenue when it satisfies
   determines whether a                         its obligation by transferring control of the good
   performance                                  or service to the customer.
   obligation meets the
                                                A performance obligation is satisfied over time
   criteria to recognize
                                                if one of the following criteria are met:
   revenue over time.
   If none of the over-                         — the customer simultaneously receives and
   time criteria are met,                         consumes the benefits as the entity
   revenue for the                                performs;
   performance                                  — the entity’s performance creates or
   obligation is                                  enhances an asset that the customer
   recognized at the                              controls as the asset is created or
   point in time that the                         enhanced; or
   customer obtains
   control of the goods                         — the entity’s performance does not create an
   or services.                                   asset with an alternative use to the entity,
                                                  and the entity has an enforceable right to
   Control is the ability
                                                  payment for performance completed to date.
   to direct the use of,
   and obtain                                   If control transfers over time, an entity selects a
   substantially all of the                     method to measure progress that is consistent
   remaining benefits                           with the objective of depicting its performance.
   from, the goods or
                                                If control transfers at a point in time, the
   services – or prevent
                                                following are some indicators that an entity
   others from doing so.
                                                considers to determine when control has
                                                passed. The customer has:
                                                —     a present obligation to pay;
                                                —     physical possession;
                                                —     legal title;
                                                —     the risks and rewards of ownership; and
                                                —     accepted the asset.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 755
                                                                                         Some basic reminders




   Customer options


   A customer option is                         Revenue is allocated to a customer option to
   accounted for as a                           acquire additional goods or services, and is
   performance                                  deferred until (1) those future goods or services
   obligation if it grants                      are transferred or (2) the option expires when it
   the customer a                               represents a material right.
   material right.
                                                A material right exists if the customer is only
                                                able to obtain the option by entering into the
                                                sale agreement and the option provides the
                                                customer with the ability to obtain the additional
                                                goods or services at a discount that is
                                                incremental to a discount typically given to that
                                                class of customer.
                                                If the option is not a material right, it is
                                                considered a marketing offer that is accounted
                                                for separately.



   Warranties


   Warranties do not                            Assurance-type warranties are generally
   have to be separately                        accounted for under Topic 460 (guarantees). A
   priced to be                                 warranty is accounted for as a performance
   accounted for as                             obligation if it includes a service beyond
   performance                                  assuring that the good complies with agreed-
   obligations.                                 upon specifications. This could require some
                                                warranties to be separated between a service
                                                element (deferral of revenue which is then
                                                recognized as the services are provided) and an
                                                assurance element (cost accrual at the time the
                                                good is transferred).



   Principal vs. agent


   Determining whether                          An entity identifies each specified good or
   an entity is the                             service to be transferred to the customer, and
   principal or an agent                        determines whether it is acting as a principal or
   when another party is                        agent for each one. In a contract to transfer




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 756
                                                                                         Some basic reminders




   involved in providing a                      multiple goods or services, an entity may be a
   good or service                              principal for some goods and services and an
   focuses on whether                           agent for others.
   the entity controls the
                                                An entity is a principal if it ‘controls’ the
   specified good or
                                                specified good or service that is promised to the
   service before it is
                                                customer before it is transferred to the
   transferred to the
                                                customer.
   customer.
                                                Indicators that an entity has obtained control of
                                                a good or service before it is transferred to the
                                                customer are:
                                                — having primary responsibility to provide
                                                  specified goods or services;
                                                — assuming inventory risk; and
                                                — having discretion to establish prices for the
                                                  specified goods or services.

                                                The indicators are not evaluated in isolation as
                                                either a separate or an additional assessment
                                                from that of the control principle. Rather, the
                                                indicators should be considered in the context
                                                of the control principle, with more weight given
                                                to those indicators that provide more relevant
                                                evidence about whether the entity has the
                                                ability to direct the use of, and obtain
                                                substantially all the remaining benefits from, the
                                                specified good or service before it is transferred
                                                to the customer.



   Contract modifications


   Topic 606 has a
                                                If any additional distinct goods or services are
   general framework to
                                                not priced at their stand-alone selling prices, the
   account for contract
                                                remaining transaction price is required to be
   modifications, which
                                                reallocated to all unsatisfied performance
   are accounted for
                                                obligations, including those from the
   either on a cumulative
                                                original contract.
   catch-up basis or a
   prospective basis.                           Topic 606 requires an entity to account for
                                                modifications either on a cumulative catch-up
                                                basis (when the additional goods or services are
                                                not distinct) or a prospective basis (when the
                                                additional goods or services are distinct).




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 757
                                                                                         Some basic reminders




   Contract costs


   Subtopic 340-40                              Subtopic 340-40 provides guidance on the
   provides guidance on                         following costs related to a contract with a
   costs to obtain and                          customer that is in the scope of Topic 606:
   fulfill a contract in the
                                                — incremental costs to obtain a contract; and
   scope of Topic 606.
                                                — costs incurred in fulfilling a contract that are
                                                  not in the scope of other guidance.
                                                Incremental costs to obtain a contract with a
   Capitalization is                            customer (e.g. sales commissions) are required
   required when the                            to be capitalized if an entity expects to recover
   criteria are met.                            those costs – unless the amortization period,
                                                which may include anticipated contracts or
                                                renewals, is less than 12 months.
   The fulfillment cost                         Fulfillment costs that are not in the scope of
   guidance only applies                        other guidance – e.g. inventory, intangibles, or
   when the costs are                           property, plant, and equipment – are capitalized
   not in the scope of                          if the fulfillment costs:
   other guidance.
                                                — relate directly to an existing contract or
                                                  specific anticipated contract;
                                                — generate or enhance resources that will be
                                                  used to satisfy performance obligations in
                                                  the future; and
                                                — are expected to be recovered.

   Capitalized contract                         An entity amortizes the assets recognized for
   costs are subject to                         the costs to obtain and/or fulfill a contract on a
   an impairment                                systematic basis, consistent with the pattern of
                                                transfer of the good or service to which the
   analysis.
                                                asset relates.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 758
                                                                                         Some basic reminders




   Presentation and disclosure


   The disclosure                                For each contract with a customer, an entity
   requirements are                              presents a contract asset, contract liability
   designed to provide                           and/or a receivable on the balance sheet, if
   financial statement                           applicable.
   users with sufficient
                                                 Topic 606 contains both qualitative and
   information to
                                                 quantitative disclosure requirements for annual
   understand the
                                                 and interim periods.
   nature, amount,
   timing and uncertainty                        There are specific disclosure requirements for:
   of revenue, certain
                                                 — disaggregation of revenue;
   costs and cash flows
                                                 — contract balances, including changes
   arising from contracts
                                                   during the period;
   with customers.
                                                 — performance obligations;
                                                 — remaining transaction price;
                                                 — significant judgments; and
                                                 — assets recognized to obtain or fulfill a
                                                   contract, including changes during the
                                                   period.
                                                Reduced disclosures are available for many
                                                nonpublic entities.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 759
                                                                                  KPMG Financial Reporting View



KPMG Financial Reporting View
Delivering guidance and insights, KPMG Financial Reporting View is ready to
inform your decision making. Stay up to date with us.




 Defining Issues                                                   Handbooks and Hot Topics

 Our collection of newsletters with                                Our discussion and analysis of
 insights and news about financial                                 accounting topics – from short Hot
 reporting and regulatory                                          Topics that deal with a topical issue,
 developments, including Quarterly                                 to our in-depth guides covering a
 Outlook and FRV Weekly.                                           broad area of accounting.




 CPE opportunities                                                 Financial Reporting Podcasts

 Register for live discussions of topical                          Tune in to hear KPMG professionals
 accounting and financial reporting                                discuss major accounting and
 issues. CPE-eligible replays also                                 financial reporting developments.
 available.




Visit Financial Reporting View
and sign up for news and insights




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 760
                                                                                  KPMG Financial Reporting View



Access our US Handbooks
As part of Financial Reporting View, our library of in-depth guidance can be
accessed here, including the following Handbooks.

 Accounting changes and error                                    Impairment of nonfinancial assets
  corrections
                                                                  Income taxes
 Asset acquisitions
                                                                  Internal control over financial
 Bankruptcies                                                     reporting

 Business combinations                                           Inventory

 Business combinations (SEC                                      Investments
  reporting)
                                                                  Leases
 Climate risk in the financial
                                                                  Leases: Real estate lessors
  statements
                                                                  Long-duration contracts
 Consolidation
                                                                  Reference rate reform
 Credit impairment
                                                                  Research and development
 Debt and equity financing
                                                                  Revenue recognition
 Derivatives and hedging

 Discontinued operations and held-  Revenue: Real estate
  for-sale disposal groups           Revenue: Software and SaaS
 Earnings per share                                              Segment reporting
 Employee benefits                                               Service concession arrangements
 Equity method of accounting                                     Share-based payment
 Fair value measurement                                          Software and website costs
 Financial statement presentation                                Statement of cash flows
 Foreign currency                                                Tax credits
 GHG emissions reporting                                         Transfers and servicing of financial
                                                                   assets
 Going concern

 IFRS® compared to US GAAP




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
                                                                                  Revenue for software and SaaS                 761
                                                                                              Acknowledgments




Acknowledgments
This Handbook has been produced by the Department of Professional Practice
(DPP) of KPMG LLP in the United States.
We would like to acknowledge the efforts of the main contributors to this
publication:
Nick Burgmeier
Scott Muir



We would also like to acknowledge the significant contributions of the following
current and former DPP members: P.K. Barot, Josh Brabbins, Mike Breen,
Meredith Canady, Alex Cadet, Yusuke Imai, Prabhakar Kalavacherla (PK), Mike
McCormick, Chris Mitchell, Andrew Mock, Jason Thomas, Kirby Vilker.

Lastly, we would like to thank the following KPMG software and SaaS industry
specialists who generously contributed their time for reviews of and input into
this publication: Margaret Gonzales, Lisa Munro.




© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent
member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
Learn about us:                                        kpmg.com

The FASB Accounting Standards Codification® material is copyrighted by the Financial Accounting Foundation, Norwalk, Connecticut.

© 2024 KPMG LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organization of independent member firms
affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved. USCS013296-1A

The KPMG name and logo are trademarks used under license by the independent member firms of the KPMG global organization.

The information contained herein is of a general nature and is not intended to address the circumstances of any particular individual or entity.
Although we endeavor to provide accurate and timely information, there can be no guarantee that such information is accurate as of the date it
is received or that it will continue to be accurate in the future. No one should act upon such information without appropriate professional advice
after a thorough examination of the particular situation.
